## **2.3. Processor subsystem**

The RP2040 processor subsystem consists of two Arm Cortex-M0+ processors — each with its standard internal Arm CPU peripherals — alongside external peripherals for GPIO access and inter-core communication. Details of the Arm Cortex-M0+ processors, including the specific feature configuration used on RP2040, can be found in Section 2.4.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**26**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 203] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 6. Two Cortex-<br>M0+ processors, each From peripherals From external debugger<br>with a dedicated 32-bit<br>Interrupts Serial Wire Debug<br>AHB-Lite bus port, for<br>code fetch, loads and<br>stores. The SIO is<br>connected to the<br>single-cycle IOPORT NVIC DAP NVIC DAP<br>bus of each processor,<br>Core 0  Core 1<br>and provides GPIO Events<br>Cortex-M0+ Cortex-M0+<br>access, two-way<br>communications, and Bus Interface IOPORT SIO IOPORT Bus Interface<br>other core-local<br>peripherals. Both AHB-Lite GPIO ×36 AHB-Lite<br>processors can be<br>debugged via a single To bus fabric To GPIO Muxing To bus fabric<br>multi-drop Serial Wire<br>Debug bus. 26<br>interrupts (plus NMI)  NOTE<br>are routed to the NVIC<br>and WIC on each The terms  core0  and  core1 ,  proc0  and  proc1<br>processor.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The terms _core0_ and _core1_ , _proc0_ and _proc1_ are used interchangeably in RP2040’s registers and documentation to refer to processor 0, and processor 1 respectively.

The processors use a number of interfaces to communicate with the rest of the system:

- [Each processor uses its own independent 32-bit AHB-Lite bus to access memory and memory-mapped peripherals] (more detail in Section 2.1)

- [The single-cycle IO block provides high-speed, deterministic access to GPIOs via each processor’s IOPORT]

- [26 system-level interrupts are routed to both processors]

- [A multi-drop Serial Wire Debug bus provides debug access to both processors from an external debug host]

## **2.3.1. SIO**

The Single-cycle IO block (SIO) contains several peripherals that require low-latency, deterministic access from the processors. It is accessed via each processor’s IOPORT: this is an auxiliary bus port on the Cortex-M0+ which can perform rapid 32-bit reads and writes. The SIO has a dedicated bus interface for each processor’s IOPORT, as shown in Figure 7. Processors access their IOPORT with normal load and store instructions, directed to the special IOPORT address segment, 0xd0000000…0xdfffffff. The SIO appears as memory-mapped hardware within the IOPORT space.

##  **NOTE**

The SIO is not connected to the main system bus due to its tight timing requirements. It can only be accessed by the processors, or by the debugger via the processor debug ports.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**27**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 337] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 7. The single-<br>cycle IO block<br>contains memory- Core 0 Core 1<br>mapped hardware<br>which the processors<br>must be able to IOPORT Single-cycle IO IOPORT<br>access quickly. The<br>FIFOs and spinlocks<br>CPUID 0 CPUID 1<br>support message<br>passing and<br>synchronisation FIFO 0 to 1<br>between the two<br>cores. The shared<br>GPIO registers provide FIFO 1 to 0<br>fast and concurrency-<br>safe direct access to Bus  Bus<br>GPIO-capable pins. Hardware Spinlock ×32<br>Some core-local Interface Interface<br>arithmetic hardware<br>can be used to Integer Divider Integer Divider<br>accelerate common<br>tasks on the<br>Interpolator 0 Interpolator 0<br>processors.<br>Interpolator 1 Interpolator 1<br>GPIO Registers Shared, atomic<br>set/clear/xor<br>GPIO ×36<br>To GPIO Muxing<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


All IOPORT reads and writes (and therefore all SIO accesses) take place in exactly one cycle, unlike the main AHB-Lite system bus, where the Cortex-M0+ requires two cycles for a load or store, and may have to wait longer due to contention from other system bus masters. This is vital for interfaces such as GPIO, which have tight timing requirements.

SIO registers are mapped to word-aligned addresses in the range 0xd0000000…0xd000017c. The remainder of the IOPORT space is reserved for future use.

The SIO peripherals are described in more detail in the following sections.

## **2.3.1.1. CPUID**

The register CPUID is the first register in the IOPORT space. Core 0 reads a value of 0 when accessing this address, and core 1 reads a value of 1. This is a convenient method for software to determine on which core it is running. This is checked during the initial boot sequence: both cores start running simultaneously, core 1 goes into a deep sleep state, and core 0 continues with the main boot sequence.

##  **IMPORTANT**

CPUID should not be confused with the Cortex-M0+ CPUID register (Section 2.4.4.1.1) on each processor’s internal Private Peripheral Bus, which lists the processor’s part number and version.

## **2.3.1.2. GPIO Control**

The processors have access to GPIO registers for fast and direct control of pins with GPIO functionality. There are two identical sets of registers:

2.3. Processor subsystem

**28**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [GPIO_x][ for direct control of IO bank 0 (user GPIOs 0 to 29, starting at the LSB)]

- [GPIO_HI_x][ for direct control of the QSPI IO bank (in the order SCLK, SSn, SD0, SD1, SD2, SD3, starting at the LSB)]

##  **NOTE**

To drive a pin with the SIO’s GPIO registers, the GPIO multiplexer for this pin must first be configured to select the SIO GPIO function. See Table 279.

These GPIO registers are _shared_ between the two cores, and both cores can access them simultaneously. There are three registers for each bank:

- [Output registers, ][GPIO_OUT][ and ][GPIO_HI_OUT][, are used to set the output level of the GPIO (1/0 for high/low)]

- [Output enable registers, ][GPIO_OE][ and ][GPIO_HI_OE][, are used to enable the output driver. 0 for high-impedance, 1] for drive high/low based on GPIO_OUT and GPIO_HI_OUT.

- [Input registers, ][GPIO_IN][ and ][GPIO_HI_IN][, allow the processor to sample the current state of the GPIOs]

Reading GPIO_IN returns all 30 GPIO values (or 6 for GPIO_HI_IN) in a single read. Software can then mask out individual pins it is interested in.

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_gpio/include/hardware/gpio.h Lines 859 - 869_

859 static inline bool gpio_get(uint gpio) { 860 _#ifdef NUM_BANK0_GPIOS <= 32_ 861     return sio_hw->gpio_in & (1u << gpio); 862 _#else_ 863     if (gpio < 32) { 864         return sio_hw->gpio_in & (1u << gpio); 865     } else { 866         return sio_hw->gpio_hi_in & (1u << (gpio - 32)); 867     } 868 _#endif_ 869 }

The OUT and OE registers also have atomic SET, CLR, and XOR aliases, which allows software to update a subset of the pins in one operation. This is vital not only for safe parallel GPIO access between the two cores, but also safe concurrent GPIO access in an interrupt handler and foreground code running on one core.

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_gpio/include/hardware/gpio.h Lines 908 - 914_

908 static inline void gpio_set_mask(uint32_t mask) { 909 _#ifdef PICO_USE_GPIO_COPROCESSOR_ 910     gpioc_lo_out_set(mask); 911 _#else_ 912     sio_hw->gpio_set = mask; 913 _#endif_ 914 }

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_gpio/include/hardware/gpio.h Lines 955 - 961_

955 static inline void gpio_clr_mask(uint32_t mask) { 956 _#ifdef PICO_USE_GPIO_COPROCESSOR_ 957     gpioc_lo_out_clr(mask); 958 _#else_ 959     sio_hw->gpio_clr = mask; 960 _#endif_ 961 }

2.3. Processor subsystem

**29**

RP2040 Datasheet

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_gpio/include/hardware/gpio.h Lines 1145 - 1170_

1145 static inline void gpio_put(uint gpio, bool value) { 1146 _#ifdef PICO_USE_GPIO_COPROCESSOR_ 1147     gpioc_bit_out_put(gpio, value); 1148 _#elif NUM_BANK0_GPIOS <= 32_ 1149     uint32_t mask = 1ul << gpio; 1150     if (value) 1151         gpio_set_mask(mask); 1152     else 1153         gpio_clr_mask(mask); 1154 _#else_ 1155     uint32_t mask = 1ul << (gpio & 0x1fu); 1156     if (gpio < 32) { 1157         if (value) { 1158             sio_hw->gpio_set = mask; 1159         } else { 1160             sio_hw->gpio_clr = mask; 1161         } 1162     } else { 1163         if (value) { 1164             sio_hw->gpio_hi_set = mask; 1165         } else { 1166             sio_hw->gpio_hi_clr = mask; 1167         } 1168     } 1169 _#endif_ 1170 }

If both processors write to an OUT or OE register (or any of its SET/CLR/XOR aliases) on the same clock cycle, the result is as though core 0 wrote first, and core 1 wrote immediately afterward. For example, if core 0 SETs a bit, and core 1 simultaneously XORs it, the bit will be set to 0, irrespective of it original value.

##  **NOTE**

This is a conceptual model for the result that is produced when two cores write to a GPIO register simultaneously. The register does not actually contain this intermediate value at any point. In the previous example, if the pin is initially 0, and core 0 performs a SET while core 1 performs a XOR, the GPIO output remains low without any positive glitch.

## **2.3.1.3. Hardware Spinlocks**

The SIO provides 32 hardware spinlocks, which can be used to manage mutually-exclusive access to shared software resources. Each spinlock is a one-bit flag, mapped to a different address (from SPINLOCK0 to SPINLOCK31). Software interacts with each spinlock with one of the following operations:

- [Read: attempt to claim the lock. Read value is nonzero if the lock was successfully claimed, or zero if the lock had] already been claimed by a previous read.

- [Write (any value): release the lock. The next attempt to claim the lock will be successful.]

If both cores try to claim the same lock on the same clock cycle, core 0 succeeds.

Generally software will acquire a lock by repeatedly polling the lock bit ("spinning" on the lock) until it is successfully claimed. This is inefficient if the lock is held for long periods, so generally the spinlocks should be used to protect the short critical sections of higher-level primitives such as mutexes, semaphores and queues.

For debugging purposes, the current state of all 32 spinlocks can be observed via SPINLOCK_ST.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**30**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.3.1.4. Inter-processor FIFOs (Mailboxes)**

The SIO contains two FIFOs for passing data, messages or ordered events between the two cores. Each FIFO is 32 bits wide, and eight entries deep. One of the FIFOs can only be written by core 0, and read by core 1. The other can only be written by core 1, and read by core 0.

Each core writes to its outgoing FIFO by writing to FIFO_WR, and reads from its incoming FIFO by reading from FIFO_RD. A status register, FIFO_ST, provides the following status signals:

- [Incoming FIFO contains data (][VLD][)]

- [Outgoing FIFO has room for more data (][RDY][)]

- [The incoming FIFO was read from while empty at some point in the past (][ROE][)]

- [The outgoing FIFO was written to while full at some point in the past (][WOF][)]

Writing to the outgoing FIFO while full, or reading from the incoming FIFO while empty, does not affect the FIFO state. The current contents and level of the FIFO is preserved. However, this does represent some loss of data or reception of invalid data by the software accessing the FIFO, so a sticky error flag is raised (ROE or WOF).

The SIO has a FIFO IRQ output for each core, mapped to system IRQ numbers 15 and 16. Each IRQ output is the logical OR of the VLD, ROE and WOF bits in that core’s FIFO_ST register: that is, the IRQ is asserted if any of these three bits is high, and clears again when they are all low. The ROE and WOF flags are cleared by writing any value to FIFO_ST, and the VLD flag is cleared by reading data from the FIFO until empty.

If the corresponding interrupt line is enabled in the Cortex-M0+ NVIC, then the processor will take an interrupt each time data appears in its FIFO, or if it has performed some invalid FIFO operation (read on empty, write on full). Typically Core 0 will use IRQ15 and core 1 will use IRQ16. If the IRQs are used the other way round then it is difficult for the core that has been interrupted to correctly identify the reason for the interrupt as the core doesn’t have access to the other core’s FIFO status register.

##  **NOTE**

ROE and WOF only become set if software misbehaves in some way. Generally, the interrupt handler will trigger when data appears in the FIFO (raising the VLD flag), and the interrupt handler clears the IRQ by reading data from the FIFO until VLD goes low once more.

The inter-processor FIFOs and the Cortex-M0+ Event signals are used by the bootrom (Section 2.8) wait_for_vector routine, where core 1 remains in a sleep state until it is woken, and provided with its initial stack pointer, entry point and vector table through the FIFO.

## **2.3.1.5. Integer Divider**

The SIO provides one 8-cycle signed/unsigned divide/modulo module to each of the cores. Calculation is started by writing a dividend and divisor to the two argument registers, DIVIDEND and DIVISOR. The divider calculates the quotient / and remainder % of this division over the next 8 cycles, and on the 9th cycle the results can be read from the two result registers DIV_QUOTIENT and DIV_REMAINDER. A 'ready' bit in register DIV_CSR can be polled to wait for the calculation to complete, or software can insert a fixed 8-cycle delay.

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_divider/divider.S Lines 12 - 16_

12 regular_func_with_section hw_divider_divmod_s32 13     ldr r3, =(SIO_BASE) 14     str r0, [r3, #SIO_DIV_SDIVIDEND_OFFSET] 15     str r1, [r3, #SIO_DIV_SDIVISOR_OFFSET] 16     b hw_divider_divmod_return

2.3. Processor subsystem

**31**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

Software is free to perform other non-divider operations during these 8 cycles.

There are two aliases of the operand registers: writing to the signed alias (DIV_SDIVIDEND and DIV_SDIVISOR) will initiate a signed calculation, and the other (DIV_UDIVIDEND and DIV_UDIVISOR) will initiate an unsigned calculation.

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_divider/divider.S Lines 20 - 24_

20 regular_func_with_section hw_divider_divmod_u32 21     ldr r3, =(SIO_BASE) 22     str r0, [r3, #SIO_DIV_UDIVIDEND_OFFSET] 23     str r1, [r3, #SIO_DIV_UDIVISOR_OFFSET] 24     b hw_divider_divmod_return

##  **NOTE**

A new calculation begins immediately with _every_ write to an operand register, and a new operand write immediately squashes any calculation currently in progress. For example, when dividing many numbers by the same divisor, only xDIVISOR needs to be written, and the signedness of each calculation is determined by whether SDIVIDEND or UDIVIDEND is written.

To support save and restore on interrupt handler entry/exit (or on e.g. an RTOS context switch), the result registers are also writable. Writing to a result register will cancel any operation in progress at the time. The DIV_CSR.DIRTY flag can help make save/restore more efficient: this flag is set when _any_ divider register (operand or result) is written to, and cleared when the quotient is read.

##  **NOTE**

When enabled, the default divider AEABI support maps C level / and % to the hardware divider. When building software using the SDK and using the divider directly, it is important to read the quotient register _last_ . This ensures the partial divider state will be correctly saved and restored by any interrupt code that uses the divider. You should read the quotient register whether you need the value or not.

The SDK module pico_divider https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/common/ pico_divider_headers/include/pico/divider.h provides both the _AEABI_ implementation needed to hook the C / and % operators for both 32-bit and 64-bit integer division, as well as some additional C functions that return quotients and remainders at the same time. All of these functions correctly save and restore the hardware divider state (when dirty) so that they can be used in either user or IRQ handler code.

The SDK module hardware_divider https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/ hardware_divider/include/hardware/divider.h provides lower level macros and helper functions for accessing the hardware_divider, but these do not save and restore the hardware divider state (although this header does provide separate functions to do so).

## **2.3.1.6. Interpolator**

Each core is equipped with two _interpolators_ (INTERP0 and INTERP1) which can accelerate tasks by combining certain preconfigured operations into a single processor cycle. Intended for cases where the pre-configured operation is repeated many times, this results in code which uses both fewer CPU cycles and fewer CPU registers in the time-critical sections of the code.

The interpolators are used to accelerate audio operations within the SDK, but their flexible configuration makes it possible to optimise many other tasks such as quantization and dithering, table lookup address generation, affine texture mapping, decompression and linear feedback.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**32**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [484 x 193] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 8. An<br>interpolator. The two<br>accumulator registers Base 0<br>and three base<br>registers have single-<br>cycle read/write Result 0 0 0 1 1<br>access from the Accumulator 0 Right Shift Mask Sign-extend  + Result 0<br> fromMask<br>processor. The Result 1 1 1 0 0<br>interpolator is Accumulator 1<br>organised into two<br>Base 2 + Result 2<br>lanes, which perform<br>masking, shifting and<br>Accumulator 0<br>sign-extension Result 0 1 1 0 0<br>operations on the two Accumulator 1 Right Shift Mask Sign-extend  + Result 1<br>accumulators. This Result 1 0 0  fromMask 1 1<br>produces three<br>possible results, by<br>adding the Base 1<br>intermediate<br>shift/mask values to<br>the three base<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


_registers. From left to right, the multiplexers on each lane are controlled by the following flags in the CTRL registers: CROSS_RESULT, CROSS_INPUT, SIGNED, ADD_RAW._

The processor can write or read any interpolator register in one cycle, and the results are ready on the next cycle. The processor can also perform an addition on one of the two accumulators ACCUM0 or ACCUM1 by writing to the corresponding ACCUMx_ADD register.

The three results are available in the read-only locations PEEK0, PEEK1, PEEK2. Reading from these locations does not change the state of the interpolator. The results are also aliased at the locations POP0, POP1, POP2; reading from a POPx alias returns the same result as the corresponding PEEKx, and simultaneously writes back the lane results to the accumulators. This can be used to advance the state of interpolator each time a result is read.

Additionally the interpolator supports simple fractional blending between two values as well as clamping values such that they lie within a given range.

The following example shows a trivial example of _popping_ a lane result to produce simple iterative feedback.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 11 - 23_

11 void times_table() { 12     puts("9 times table:"); 13 14 _// Initialise lane 0 on interp0 on this core_ 15     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 16     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 17 18     interp0->accum[0] = 0; 19     interp0->base[0] = 9; 20 21     for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i) 22         printf("%d\n", interp0->pop[0]); 23 }

##  **NOTE**

By sheer coincidence, the interpolators are extremely well suited to SNES MODE7-style graphics routines. For example, on each core, INTERP0 can provide a stream of tile lookups for some affine transform, and INTERP1 can provide offsets into the tiles for the same transform.

## **2.3.1.6.1. Lane Operations**

2.3. Processor subsystem

**33**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 9. Each lane of each interpolator can be configured to_ Result 0 0 0 1 1 _perform mask, shift_ Accumulator 0 Right Shift Mask Sign-extend Add to BASE1 fromMask (for PEEK0/POP0) _and sign-extension on_ Result 1 1 1 0 0 _one of the_ Accumulator 1 Add to BASE2 _accumulators. This is_ (forms part of _fed into adders which_ PEEK2/POP2) _produces final results, which may optionally be fed back into the_ Each lane performs these three operations, in sequence: _accumulators with each read. The_ •[A right shift by ][CTRL_LANEx_SHIFT][ (0 to 31 bits)] _datapath can be configured using a_ •[A mask of bits from ][CTRL_LANEx_MASK_LSB][ to ][CTRL_LANEx_MASK_MSB][ inclusive (each ranging from bit 0 to bit 31)] _handful of 32-bit multiplexers. From left_ •[A sign extension from the top of the mask, i.e. take bit ][CTRL_LANEx_MASK_MSB][ and OR it into all more-significant bits, if] _to right, these are_ CTRL_LANEx_SIGNED is set _controlled by the following CTRL flags:_ For example, if: _CROSS_RESULT, CROSS_INPUT,_ •[ACCUM0][ = ][0xdeadbeef] _SIGNED, ADD_RAW._

- [CTRL_LANE0_SHIFT][ = 8]

- [CTRL_LANE0_MASK_LSB][ = 4]

- [CTRL_LANE0_MASK_MSB][ = 7]

- [CTRL_SIGNED][ = 1]

Then lane 0 would produce the following results at each stage:

- [Right shift by 8 to produce ][0x00deadbe]

- [Mask bits 7 to 4 to produce ][0x00deadbe & 0x000000f0][ = ][0x000000b0]

- [Sign-extend up from bit 7 to produce ][0xffffffb0]

In software:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 25 - 46_

25 void moving_mask() { 26     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 27     interp0->accum[0] = 0x1234abcd; 28 29     puts("Masking:"); 30     printf("ACCUM0 = %08x\n", interp0->accum[0]); 31     for (int i = 0; i < 8; ++i) { 32 _// LSB, then MSB. These are inclusive, so 0,31 means "the entire 32 bit register"_ 33         interp_config_set_mask(&cfg, i * 4, i * 4 + 3); 34         interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 35 _// Reading from ACCUMx_ADD returns the raw lane shift and mask value, without BASEx added_ 36         printf("Nibble %d: %08x\n", i, interp0->add_raw[0]); 37     } 38 39     puts("Masking with sign extension:"); 40     interp_config_set_signed(&cfg, true); 41     for (int i = 0; i < 8; ++i) { 42         interp_config_set_mask(&cfg, i * 4, i * 4 + 3); 43         interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 44         printf("Nibble %d: %08x\n", i, interp0->add_raw[0]); 45     } 46 }

The above example should print:

2.3. Processor subsystem

**34**

RP2040 Datasheet

ACCUM0 = 1234abcd Nibble 0: 0000000d Nibble 1: 000000c0 Nibble 2: 00000b00 Nibble 3: 0000a000 Nibble 4: 00040000 Nibble 5: 00300000 Nibble 6: 02000000 Nibble 7: 10000000 Masking with sign extension: Nibble 0: fffffffd Nibble 1: ffffffc0 Nibble 2: fffffb00 Nibble 3: ffffa000 Nibble 4: 00040000 Nibble 5: 00300000 Nibble 6: 02000000 Nibble 7: 10000000

Changing the result and input multiplexers can create feedback between the accumulators. This is useful e.g. for audio dithering.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 48 - 66_

48 void cross_lanes() { 49     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 50     interp_config_set_cross_result(&cfg, true); 51 _// ACCUM0 gets lane 1 result:_ 52     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 53 _// ACCUM1 gets lane 0 result:_ 54     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 55 56     interp0->accum[0] = 123; 57     interp0->accum[1] = 456; 58     interp0->base[0] = 1; 59     interp0->base[1] = 0; 60     puts("Lane result crossover:"); 61     for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i) { 62         uint32_t peek0 = interp0->peek[0]; 63         uint32_t pop1 = interp0->pop[1]; 64         printf("PEEK0, POP1: %d, %d\n", peek0, pop1); 65     } 66 }

This should print:

PEEK0, POP1: 124, 456 PEEK0, POP1: 457, 124 PEEK0, POP1: 125, 457 PEEK0, POP1: 458, 125 PEEK0, POP1: 126, 458 PEEK0, POP1: 459, 126 PEEK0, POP1: 127, 459 PEEK0, POP1: 460, 127 PEEK0, POP1: 128, 460 PEEK0, POP1: 461, 128

2.3. Processor subsystem

**35**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.3.1.6.2. Blend Mode**

Blend mode is available on INTERP0 on each core, and is enabled by the CTRL_LANE0_BLEND control flag. It performs linear interpolation, which we define as follows:

**==> picture [122 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

Where is the register BASE0, is the register BASE1, and is a fractional value formed from the least significant 8 bits of the lane 1 shift and mask value.

Blend mode has the following differences from normal mode:

- [PEEK0][, ][POP0][ return the 8-bit alpha value (the 8 LSBs of the lane 1 shift and mask value), with zeroes in result bits 31] down to 24.

- [PEEK1][, ][POP1][ return the linear interpolation between ][BASE0][ and ][BASE1]

- [PEEK2][, ][POP2][ do not include lane 1 result in the addition (i.e. it is ][BASE2][ + lane 0 shift and mask value)]

The result of the linear interpolation is equal to BASE0 when the alpha value is 0, and equal to BASE0 + 255/256 * (BASE1 - BASE0) when the alpha value is all-ones.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 68 - 87_

68 void simple_blend1() { 69     puts("Simple blend 1:"); 70 71     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 72     interp_config_set_blend(&cfg, true); 73     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 74 75     cfg = interp_default_config(); 76     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 77 78     interp0->base[0] = 500; 79     interp0->base[1] = 1000; 80 81     for (int i = 0; i <= 6; i++) { 82 _// set fraction to value between 0 and 255_ 83         interp0->accum[1] = 255 * i / 6; 84 _// ≈ 500 + (1000 - 500) * i / 6;_ 85         printf("%d\n", (int) interp0->peek[1]); 86     } 87 }

This should print (note the 255/256 resulting in 998 not 1000):

500 582 666 748 832 914 998

CTRL_LANE1_SIGNED controls whether BASE0 and BASE1 are sign-extended for this interpolation (this sign extension is required because the interpolation produces an intermediate product value 40 bits in size). CTRL_LANE0_SIGNED continues to control the sign extension of the lane 0 intermediate result in PEEK2, POP2 as normal.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**36**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 90 - 121_

90 void print_simple_blend2_results(bool is_signed) { 91 _// lane 1 signed flag controls whether base 0/1 are treated as signed or unsigned_ 92     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 93     interp_config_set_signed(&cfg, is_signed); 94     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 95 96     for (int i = 0; i <= 6; i++) { 97         interp0->accum[1] = 255 * i / 6; 98         if (is_signed) { 99             printf("%d\n", (int) interp0->peek[1]); 100         } else { 101             printf("0x%08x\n", (uint) interp0->peek[1]); 102         } 103     } 104 } 105 106 void simple_blend2() { 107     puts("Simple blend 2:"); 108 109     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 110     interp_config_set_blend(&cfg, true); 111     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 112 113     interp0->base[0] = (uint32_t) -1000; 114     interp0->base[1] = 1000; 115 116     puts("signed:"); 117     print_simple_blend2_results(true); 118 119     puts("unsigned:"); 120     print_simple_blend2_results(false); 121 }

This should print:

signed: -1000 -672 -336 -8 328 656 992 unsigned: 0xfffffc18 0xd5fffd60 0xaafffeb0 0x80fffff8 0x56000148 0x2c000290 0x010003e0

Finally, in blend mode when using the BASE_1AND0 register to send a 16-bit value to each of BASE0 and BASE1 with a single 32-bit write, the sign-extension of these 16-bit values to full 32-bit values during the write is controlled by CTRL_LANE1_SIGNED for both bases, as opposed to non-blend-mode operation, where CTRL_LANE0_SIGNED affects extension into BASE0 and CTRL_LANE1_SIGNED affects extension into BASE1.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**37**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 124 - 145_

124 void simple_blend3() { 125     puts("Simple blend 3:"); 126 127     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 128     interp_config_set_blend(&cfg, true); 129     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 130 131     cfg = interp_default_config(); 132     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 133 134     interp0->accum[1] = 128; 135     interp0->base01 = 0x30005000; 136     printf("0x%08x\n", (int) interp0->peek[1]); 137     interp0->base01 = 0xe000f000; 138     printf("0x%08x\n", (int) interp0->peek[1]); 139 140     interp_config_set_signed(&cfg, true); 141     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 142 143     interp0->base01 = 0xe000f000; 144     printf("0x%08x\n", (int) interp0->peek[1]); 145 }

This should print:

0x00004000 0x0000e800 0xffffe800

## **2.3.1.6.3. Clamp Mode**

Clamp mode is available on INTERP1 on each core, and is enabled by the CTRL_LANE0_CLAMP control flag. In clamp mode, the PEEK0/POP0 result is the lane value (shifted, masked, sign-extended ACCUM0) clamped between BASE0 and BASE1. In other words, if the lane value is greater than BASE1, a value of BASE1 is produced; if less than BASE0, a value of BASE0 is produced; otherwise, the value passes through. No addition is performed. The signedness of these comparisons is controlled by the CTRL_LANE0_SIGNED flag.

Other than this, the interpolator behaves the same as in normal mode.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 193 - 211_

193 void clamp() { 194     puts("Clamp:"); 195     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 196     interp_config_set_clamp(&cfg, true); 197     interp_config_set_shift(&cfg, 2); 198 _// set mask according to new position of sign bit.._ 199     interp_config_set_mask(&cfg, 0, 29); 200 _// ...so that the shifted value is correctly sign extended_ 201     interp_config_set_signed(&cfg, true); 202     interp_set_config(interp1, 0, &cfg); 203 204     interp1->base[0] = 0; 205     interp1->base[1] = 255; 206 207     for (int i = -1024; i <= 1024; i += 256) {

2.3. Processor subsystem

**38**

RP2040 Datasheet

208         interp1->accum[0] = i; 209         printf("%d\t%d\n", i, (int) interp1->peek[0]); 210     } 211 }

This should print:

-1024   0 -768    0 -512    0 -256    0 0       0 256     64 512     128 768     192 1024    255

## **2.3.1.6.4. Sample Use Case: Linear Interpolation**

Linear interpolation is a more complete example of using blend mode in conjunction with other interpolator functionality:

In this example, ACCUM0 is used to track a fixed point (integer/fraction) position within a list of values to be interpolated. Lane 0 is used to produce an address into the value array for the integer part of the position. The fractional part of the position is shifted to produce a value from 0-255 for the blend. The blend is performed between two consecutive values in the array.

Finally the fractional position is updated via a single write to ACCUM0_ADD_RAW.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 147 - 191_

147 void linear_interpolation() { 148     puts("Linear interpolation:"); 149     const int uv_fractional_bits = 12; 150 151 _// for lane 0_ 152 _// shift and mask XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX FFFF FFFF FFFF (accum 0)_ 153 _// to             0000 0000 000X XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXX0_ 154 _// i.e. non fractional part times 2 (for uint16_t)_ 155     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 156     interp_config_set_shift(&cfg, uv_fractional_bits - 1); 157     interp_config_set_mask(&cfg, 1, 32 - uv_fractional_bits); 158     interp_config_set_blend(&cfg, true); 159     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 160 161 _// for lane 1_ 162 _// shift XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX FFFF FFFF FFFF (accum 0 via cross input)_ 163 _// to    0000 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX FFFF FFFF FFFF_ 164 165     cfg = interp_default_config(); 166     interp_config_set_shift(&cfg, uv_fractional_bits - 8); 167     interp_config_set_signed(&cfg, true); 168     interp_config_set_cross_input(&cfg, true); _// signed blending_ 169     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 170 171     int16_t samples[] = {0, 10, -20, -1000, 500}; 172 173 _// step is 1/4 in our fractional representation_

2.3. Processor subsystem

**39**

RP2040 Datasheet

174     uint step = (1 << uv_fractional_bits) / 4; 175 176     interp0->accum[0] = 0; _// initial sample_offset;_ 177     interp0->base[2] = (uintptr_t) samples; 178     for (int i = 0; i < 16; i++) { 179 _// result2 = samples + (lane0 raw result)_ 180 _// i.e. ptr to the first of two samples to blend between_ 181         int16_t *sample_pair = (int16_t *) interp0->peek[2]; 182         interp0->base[0] = sample_pair[0]; 183         interp0->base[1] = sample_pair[1]; 184         uint32_t peek1 = interp0->peek[1]; 185         uint32_t add_raw1 = interp0->add_raw[1]; 186         printf("%d\t(%d%% between %d and %d)\n", (int) peek1, 187                100 * (add_raw1 & 0xff) / 0xff, 188                sample_pair[0], sample_pair[1]); 189         interp0->add_raw[0] = step; 190     } 191 }

This should print:

0       (0% between 0 and 10) 2       (25% between 0 and 10) 5       (50% between 0 and 10) 7       (75% between 0 and 10) 10      (0% between 10 and -20) 2       (25% between 10 and -20) -5      (50% between 10 and -20) -13     (75% between 10 and -20) -20     (0% between -20 and -1000) -265    (25% between -20 and -1000) -510    (50% between -20 and -1000) -755    (75% between -20 and -1000) -1000   (0% between -1000 and 500) -625    (25% between -1000 and 500) -250    (50% between -1000 and 500) 125     (75% between -1000 and 500)

This method is used for fast approximate audio upscaling in the SDK

## **2.3.1.6.5. Sample Use Case: Simple Affine Texture Mapping**

Simple affine texture mapping can be implemented by using fixed point arithmetic for texture coordinates, and stepping a fixed amount in each coordinate for every pixel in a scanline. The integer part of the texture coordinates are used to form an address within the texture to lookup a pixel colour.

By using two lanes, all three base values and the CTRL_LANEx_ADD_RAW flag, it is possible to reduce what would be quite an expensive CPU operation to a single cycle iteration using the interpolator.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/interp/hello_interp/hello_interp.c Lines 214 - 272_

214 void texture_mapping_setup(uint8_t *texture, uint texture_width_bits, uint texture_height_bits, 215                            uint uv_fractional_bits) { 216     interp_config cfg = interp_default_config(); 217 _// set add_raw flag to use raw (un-shifted and un-masked) lane accumulator value when adding_ 218 _// it to the lane base to make the lane result_

2.3. Processor subsystem

**40**

RP2040 Datasheet

219     interp_config_set_add_raw(&cfg, true); 220     interp_config_set_shift(&cfg, uv_fractional_bits); 221     interp_config_set_mask(&cfg, 0, texture_width_bits - 1); 222     interp_set_config(interp0, 0, &cfg); 223 224     interp_config_set_shift(&cfg, uv_fractional_bits - texture_width_bits); 225     interp_config_set_mask(&cfg, texture_width_bits, texture_width_bits + texture_height_bits - 1); 226     interp_set_config(interp0, 1, &cfg); 227 228     interp0->base[2] = (uintptr_t) texture; 229 } 230 231 void texture_mapped_span(uint8_t *output, uint32_t u, uint32_t v, uint32_t du, uint32_t dv, uint count) { 232 _// u, v are texture coordinates in fixed point with uv_fractional_bits fractional bits_ 233 _// du, dv are texture coordinate steps across the span in same fixed point._ 234     interp0->accum[0] = u; 235     interp0->base[0] = du; 236     interp0->accum[1] = v; 237     interp0->base[1] = dv; 238     for (uint i = 0; i < count; i++) { 239 _// equivalent to_ 240 _// uint32_t sm_result0 = (accum0 >> uv_fractional_bits) & (1 << (texture_width_bits - 1);_ 241 _// uint32_t sm_result1 = (accum1 >> uv_fractional_bits) & (1 << (texture_height_bits - 1);_ 242 _// uint8_t *address = texture + sm_result0 + (sm_result1 << texture_width_bits);_ 243 _// output[i] = *address;_ 244 _// accum0 = du + accum0;_ 245 _// accum1 = dv + accum1;_ 246 247 _// result2 is the texture address for the current pixel;_ 248 _// popping the result advances to the next iteration_ 249         output[i] = *(uint8_t *) interp0->pop[2]; 250     } 251 } 252 253 void texture_mapping() { 254     puts("Affine Texture mapping (with texture wrap):"); 255 256     uint8_t texture[] = { 257             0x00, 0x01, 0x02, 0x03, 258             0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x13, 259             0x20, 0x21, 0x22, 0x23, 260             0x30, 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 261     }; 262 _// 4x4 texture_ 263     texture_mapping_setup(texture, 2, 2, 16); 264     uint8_t output[12]; 265     uint32_t du = 65536 / 2; _// step of 1/2_ 266     uint32_t dv = 65536 / 3; _// step of 1/3_ 267     texture_mapped_span(output, 0, 0, du, dv, 12); 268 269     for (uint i = 0; i < 12; i++) { 270         printf("0x%02x\n", output[i]); 271     } 272 }

This should print:

2.3. Processor subsystem

**41**

RP2040 Datasheet

0x00 0x00 0x01 0x01 0x12 0x12 0x13 0x23 0x20 0x20 0x31 0x31

## **2.3.1.7. List of Registers**

The SIO registers start at a base address of 0xd0000000 (defined as SIO_BASE in SDK).

_Table 16. List of SIO registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x000|CPUID|Processor core identifier|
|0x004|GPIO_IN|Input value for GPIO pins|
|0x008|GPIO_HI_IN|Input value for QSPI pins|
|0x010|GPIO_OUT|GPIO output value|
|0x014|GPIO_OUT_SET|GPIO output value set|
|0x018|GPIO_OUT_CLR|GPIO output value clear|
|0x01c|GPIO_OUT_XOR|GPIO output value XOR|
|0x020|GPIO_OE|GPIO output enable|
|0x024|GPIO_OE_SET|GPIO output enable set|
|0x028|GPIO_OE_CLR|GPIO output enable clear|
|0x02c|GPIO_OE_XOR|GPIO output enable XOR|
|0x030|GPIO_HI_OUT|QSPI output value|
|0x034|GPIO_HI_OUT_SET|QSPI output value set|
|0x038|GPIO_HI_OUT_CLR|QSPI output value clear|
|0x03c|GPIO_HI_OUT_XOR|QSPI output value XOR|
|0x040|GPIO_HI_OE|QSPI output enable|
|0x044|GPIO_HI_OE_SET|QSPI output enable set|
|0x048|GPIO_HI_OE_CLR|QSPI output enable clear|
|0x04c|GPIO_HI_OE_XOR|QSPI output enable XOR|
|0x050|FIFO_ST|Status register for inter-core FIFOs (mailboxes).|
|0x054|FIFO_WR|Write access to this core’s TX FIFO|
|0x058|FIFO_RD|Read access to this core’s RX FIFO|
|0x05c|SPINLOCK_ST|Spinlock state|
|0x060|DIV_UDIVIDEND|Divider unsigned dividend|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**42**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x064|DIV_UDIVISOR|Divider unsigned divisor|
|0x068|DIV_SDIVIDEND|Divider signed dividend|
|0x06c|DIV_SDIVISOR|Divider signed divisor|
|0x070|DIV_QUOTIENT|Divider result quotient|
|0x074|DIV_REMAINDER|Divider result remainder|
|0x078|DIV_CSR|Control and status register for divider.|
|0x080|INTERP0_ACCUM0|Read/write access to accumulator 0|
|0x084|INTERP0_ACCUM1|Read/write access to accumulator 1|
|0x088|INTERP0_BASE0|Read/write access to BASE0 register.|
|0x08c|INTERP0_BASE1|Read/write access to BASE1 register.|
|0x090|INTERP0_BASE2|Read/write access to BASE2 register.|
|0x094|INTERP0_POP_LANE0|Read LANE0 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|
|0x098|INTERP0_POP_LANE1|Read LANE1 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|
|0x09c|INTERP0_POP_FULL|Read FULL result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|
|0x0a0|INTERP0_PEEK_LANE0|Read LANE0 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|
|0x0a4|INTERP0_PEEK_LANE1|Read LANE1 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|
|0x0a8|INTERP0_PEEK_FULL|Read FULL result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|
|0x0ac|INTERP0_CTRL_LANE0|Control register for lane 0|
|0x0b0|INTERP0_CTRL_LANE1|Control register for lane 1|
|0x0b4|INTERP0_ACCUM0_ADD|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM0|
|0x0b8|INTERP0_ACCUM1_ADD|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM1|
|0x0bc|INTERP0_BASE_1AND0|On write, the lower 16 bits go to BASE0, upper bits to BASE1<br>simultaneously.|
|0x0c0|INTERP1_ACCUM0|Read/write access to accumulator 0|
|0x0c4|INTERP1_ACCUM1|Read/write access to accumulator 1|
|0x0c8|INTERP1_BASE0|Read/write access to BASE0 register.|
|0x0cc|INTERP1_BASE1|Read/write access to BASE1 register.|
|0x0d0|INTERP1_BASE2|Read/write access to BASE2 register.|
|0x0d4|INTERP1_POP_LANE0|Read LANE0 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|
|0x0d8|INTERP1_POP_LANE1|Read LANE1 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|
|0x0dc|INTERP1_POP_FULL|Read FULL result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|
|0x0e0|INTERP1_PEEK_LANE0|Read LANE0 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**43**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x0e4|INTERP1_PEEK_LANE1|Read LANE1 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|
|0x0e8|INTERP1_PEEK_FULL|Read FULL result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|
|0x0ec|INTERP1_CTRL_LANE0|Control register for lane 0|
|0x0f0|INTERP1_CTRL_LANE1|Control register for lane 1|
|0x0f4|INTERP1_ACCUM0_ADD|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM0|
|0x0f8|INTERP1_ACCUM1_ADD|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM1|
|0x0fc|INTERP1_BASE_1AND0|On write, the lower 16 bits go to BASE0, upper bits to BASE1<br>simultaneously.|
|0x100|SPINLOCK0|Spinlock register 0|
|0x104|SPINLOCK1|Spinlock register 1|
|0x108|SPINLOCK2|Spinlock register 2|
|0x10c|SPINLOCK3|Spinlock register 3|
|0x110|SPINLOCK4|Spinlock register 4|
|0x114|SPINLOCK5|Spinlock register 5|
|0x118|SPINLOCK6|Spinlock register 6|
|0x11c|SPINLOCK7|Spinlock register 7|
|0x120|SPINLOCK8|Spinlock register 8|
|0x124|SPINLOCK9|Spinlock register 9|
|0x128|SPINLOCK10|Spinlock register 10|
|0x12c|SPINLOCK11|Spinlock register 11|
|0x130|SPINLOCK12|Spinlock register 12|
|0x134|SPINLOCK13|Spinlock register 13|
|0x138|SPINLOCK14|Spinlock register 14|
|0x13c|SPINLOCK15|Spinlock register 15|
|0x140|SPINLOCK16|Spinlock register 16|
|0x144|SPINLOCK17|Spinlock register 17|
|0x148|SPINLOCK18|Spinlock register 18|
|0x14c|SPINLOCK19|Spinlock register 19|
|0x150|SPINLOCK20|Spinlock register 20|
|0x154|SPINLOCK21|Spinlock register 21|
|0x158|SPINLOCK22|Spinlock register 22|
|0x15c|SPINLOCK23|Spinlock register 23|
|0x160|SPINLOCK24|Spinlock register 24|
|0x164|SPINLOCK25|Spinlock register 25|
|0x168|SPINLOCK26|Spinlock register 26|
|0x16c|SPINLOCK27|Spinlock register 27|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**44**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x170|SPINLOCK28|Spinlock register 28|
|0x174|SPINLOCK29|Spinlock register 29|
|0x178|SPINLOCK30|Spinlock register 30|
|0x17c|SPINLOCK31|Spinlock register 31|



## **SIO: CPUID Register**

|_Table 17. CPUID_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 18. GPIO_IN_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 19. GPIO_HI_IN_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 20. GPIO_OUT_<br>_Register_|**Offset**: 0x000<br>**Description**<br>Processor core identifier|**Offset**: 0x000<br>**Description**<br>Processor core identifier|**Offset**: 0x000<br>**Description**<br>Processor core identifier|**Offset**: 0x000<br>**Description**<br>Processor core identifier|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Value is 0 when read from processor core 0, and 1 when read from processor<br>core 1.|RO|-|
||**SIO: GPIO_IN Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x004<br>**Description**<br>Input value for GPIO pins||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Input value for GPIO0…29|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: GPIO_HI_IN Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x008<br>**Description**<br>Input value for QSPI pins||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|Input value on QSPI IO in order 0..5: SCLK, SSn, SD0, SD1, SD2, SD3|RO|0x00|
||**SIO: GPIO_OUT Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x010<br>**Description**<br>GPIO output value||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**45**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|29:0|Set output level (1/0→high/low) for GPIO0…29.<br>Reading back gives the last value written, NOT the input value from the pins.<br>If core 0 and core 1 both write to GPIO_OUT simultaneously (or to a<br>SET/CLR/XOR alias),<br>the result is as though the write from core 0 took place first,<br>and the write from core 1 was then applied to that intermediate result.|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: GPIO_OUT_SET Register**

**Offset** : 0x014 **Description**

GPIO output value set

|_Table 21._<br>_GPIO_OUT_SET_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 22._<br>_GPIO_OUT_CLR_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 23._<br>_GPIO_OUT_XOR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Perform an atomic bit-set on GPIO_OUT, i.e.GPIO_OUT |= wdata|WO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: GPIO_OUT_CLR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x018<br>**Description**<br>GPIO output value clear||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Perform an atomic bit-clear on GPIO_OUT, i.e.GPIO_OUT &= ~wdata|WO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: GPIO_OUT_XOR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x01c<br>**Description**<br>GPIO output value XOR||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Perform an atomic bitwise XOR on GPIO_OUT, i.e.GPIO_OUT ^= wdata|WO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: GPIO_OE Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x020<br>**Description**<br>GPIO output enable||||



|_Table 24. GPIO_OE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**46**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|29:0|Set output enable (1/0→output/input) for GPIO0…29.<br>Reading back gives the last value written.<br>If core 0 and core 1 both write to GPIO_OE simultaneously (or to a<br>SET/CLR/XOR alias),<br>the result is as though the write from core 0 took place first,<br>and the write from core 1 was then applied to that intermediate result.|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: GPIO_OE_SET Register**

**Offset** : 0x024

## **Description**

GPIO output enable set

|_Table 25._<br>_GPIO_OE_SET Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Perform an atomic bit-set on GPIO_OE, i.e.GPIO_OE |= wdata|WO|0x00000000|



## **SIO: GPIO_OE_CLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x028

## **Description**

GPIO output enable clear

|_Table 26._<br>_GPIO_OE_CLR Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Perform an atomic bit-clear on GPIO_OE, i.e.GPIO_OE &= ~wdata|WO|0x00000000|



## **SIO: GPIO_OE_XOR Register**

**Offset** : 0x02c

## **Description**

GPIO output enable XOR

|_Table 27._<br>_GPIO_OE_XOR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|Reserved.|-|-|
||29:0|Perform an atomic bitwise XOR on GPIO_OE, i.e.GPIO_OE ^= wdata|WO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: GPIO_HI_OUT Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x030<br>**Description**||||



QSPI output value

|_Table 28._<br>_GPIO_HI_OUT Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**47**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|5:0|Set output level (1/0→high/low) for QSPI IO0…5.<br>Reading back gives the last value written, NOT the input value from the pins.<br>If core 0 and core 1 both write to GPIO_HI_OUT simultaneously (or to a<br>SET/CLR/XOR alias),<br>the result is as though the write from core 0 took place first,<br>and the write from core 1 was then applied to that intermediate result.|RW|0x00|



## **SIO: GPIO_HI_OUT_SET Register**

**Offset** : 0x034 **Description**

QSPI output value set

|_Table 29._<br>_GPIO_HI_OUT_SET_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 30._<br>_GPIO_HI_OUT_CLR_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 31._<br>_GPIO_HI_OUT_XOR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|Perform an atomic bit-set on GPIO_HI_OUT, i.e.GPIO_HI_OUT |= wdata|WO|0x00|
||**SIO: GPIO_HI_OUT_CLR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x038<br>**Description**<br>QSPI output value clear||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|Perform an atomic bit-clear on GPIO_HI_OUT, i.e.GPIO_HI_OUT &= ~wdata|WO|0x00|
||**SIO: GPIO_HI_OUT_XOR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x03c<br>**Description**<br>QSPI output value XOR||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|Perform an atomic bitwise XOR on GPIO_HI_OUT, i.e.GPIO_HI_OUT ^= wdata|WO|0x00|
||**SIO: GPIO_HI_OE Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x040<br>**Description**<br>QSPI output enable||||



|_Table 32. GPIO_HI_OE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**48**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|5:0|Set output enable (1/0→output/input) for QSPI IO0…5.<br>Reading back gives the last value written.<br>If core 0 and core 1 both write to GPIO_HI_OE simultaneously (or to a<br>SET/CLR/XOR alias),<br>the result is as though the write from core 0 took place first,<br>and the write from core 1 was then applied to that intermediate result.|RW|0x00|



## **SIO: GPIO_HI_OE_SET Register**

**Offset** : 0x044

## **Description**

QSPI output enable set

_Table 33. GPIO_HI_OE_SET Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
|5:0|Perform an atomic bit-set on GPIO_HI_OE, i.e.GPIO_HI_OE |= wdata|WO|0x00|



## **SIO: GPIO_HI_OE_CLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x048

## **Description**

QSPI output enable clear

_Table 34. GPIO_HI_OE_CLR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
|5:0|Perform an atomic bit-clear on GPIO_HI_OE, i.e.GPIO_HI_OE &= ~wdata|WO|0x00|



## **SIO: GPIO_HI_OE_XOR Register**

**Offset** : 0x04c

## **Description**

QSPI output enable XOR

|_Table 35._<br>_GPIO_HI_OE_XOR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|Perform an atomic bitwise XOR on GPIO_HI_OE, i.e.GPIO_HI_OE ^= wdata|WO|0x00|



## **SIO: FIFO_ST Register**

**Offset** : 0x050

## **Description**

Status register for inter-core FIFOs (mailboxes).

There is one FIFO in the core 0 → core 1 direction, and one core 1 → core 0. Both are 32 bits wide and 8 words deep.

Core 0 can see the read side of the 1→0 FIFO (RX), and the write side of 0→1 FIFO (TX).

Core 1 can see the read side of the 0→1 FIFO (RX), and the write side of 1→0 FIFO (TX).

The SIO IRQ for each core is the logical OR of the VLD, WOF and ROE fields of its FIFO_ST register.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**49**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 36. FIFO_ST Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3|**ROE**: Sticky flag indicating the RX FIFO was read when empty. This read was<br>ignored by the FIFO.|WC|0x0|
|2|**WOF**: Sticky flag indicating the TX FIFO was written when full. This write was<br>ignored by the FIFO.|WC|0x0|
|1|**RDY**: Value is 1 if this core’s TX FIFO is not full (i.e. if FIFO_WR is ready for<br>more data)|RO|0x1|
|0|**VLD**: Value is 1 if this core’s RX FIFO is not empty (i.e. if FIFO_RD is valid)|RO|0x0|



## **SIO: FIFO_WR Register**

**Offset** : 0x054

_Table 37. FIFO_WR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|Write access to this core’s TX FIFO|WF|0x00000000|



## **SIO: FIFO_RD Register**

**Offset** : 0x058

|_Table 38. FIFO_RD_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Read access to this core’s RX FIFO|RF|-|



## **SIO: SPINLOCK_ST Register**

**Offset** : 0x05c

|_Table 39._<br>_SPINLOCK_ST_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Spinlock state<br>A bitmap containing the state of all 32 spinlocks (1=locked).<br>Mainly intended for debugging.|RO|0x00000000|



## **SIO: DIV_UDIVIDEND Register**

## **Offset** : 0x060

|_Table 40._<br>_DIV_UDIVIDEND_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Divider unsigned dividend<br>Write to the DIVIDEND operand of the divider, i.e. the p inp / q.<br>Any operand write starts a new calculation. The results appear in QUOTIENT,<br>REMAINDER.<br>UDIVIDEND/SDIVIDEND are aliases of the same internal register. The U alias<br>starts an<br>unsigned calculation, and the S alias starts a signed calculation.|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: DIV_UDIVISOR Register**

**Offset** : 0x064

2.3. Processor subsystem

**50**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 41._<br>_DIV_UDIVISOR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Divider unsigned divisor<br>Write to the DIVISOR operand of the divider, i.e. the q inp / q.<br>Any operand write starts a new calculation. The results appear in QUOTIENT,<br>REMAINDER.<br>UDIVISOR/SDIVISOR are aliases of the same internal register. The U alias<br>starts an<br>unsigned calculation, and the S alias starts a signed calculation.|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: DIV_SDIVIDEND Register**

**Offset** : 0x068

|_Table 42._<br>_DIV_SDIVIDEND_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 43._<br>_DIV_SDIVISOR_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 44._<br>_DIV_QUOTIENT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Divider signed dividend<br>The same as UDIVIDEND, but starts a signed calculation, rather than unsigned.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: DIV_SDIVISOR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x06c||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Divider signed divisor<br>The same as UDIVISOR, but starts a signed calculation, rather than unsigned.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: DIV_QUOTIENT Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x070||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Divider result quotient<br>The result ofDIVIDEND / DIVISOR(division). Contents undefined while<br>CSR_READY is low.<br>For signed calculations, QUOTIENT is negative when the signs of DIVIDEND<br>and DIVISOR differ.<br>This register can be written to directly, for context save/restore purposes. This<br>halts any<br>in-progress calculation and sets the CSR_READY and CSR_DIRTY flags.<br>Reading from QUOTIENT clears the CSR_DIRTY flag, so should read results in<br>the order<br>REMAINDER, QUOTIENT if CSR_DIRTY is used.|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: DIV_REMAINDER Register**

**Offset** : 0x074

2.3. Processor subsystem

**51**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 45. DIV_REMAINDER Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|Divider result remainder<br>The result ofDIVIDEND % DIVISOR(modulo). Contents undefined while<br>CSR_READY is low.<br>For signed calculations, REMAINDER is negative only when DIVIDEND is<br>negative.<br>This register can be written to directly, for context save/restore purposes. This<br>halts any<br>in-progress calculation and sets the CSR_READY and CSR_DIRTY flags.|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: DIV_CSR Register**

**Offset** : 0x078

## **Description**

Control and status register for divider.

_Table 46. DIV_CSR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:2|Reserved.|-|-|
|1|**DIRTY**: Changes to 1 when any register is written, and back to 0 when<br>QUOTIENT is read.<br>Software can use this flag to make save/restore more efficient (skip if not<br>DIRTY).<br>If the flag is used in this way, it’s recommended to either read QUOTIENT only,<br>or REMAINDER and then QUOTIENT, to prevent data loss on context switch.|RO|0x0|
|0|**READY**: Reads as 0 when a calculation is in progress, 1 otherwise.<br>Writing an operand (xDIVIDEND, xDIVISOR) will immediately start a new<br>calculation, no<br>matter if one is already in progress.<br>Writing to a result register will immediately terminate any in-progress<br>calculation<br>and set the READY and DIRTY flags.|RO|0x1|



## **SIO: INTERP0_ACCUM0 Register**

**Offset** : 0x080

|_Table 47._<br>_INTERP0_ACCUM0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 48._<br>_INTERP0_ACCUM1_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Read/write access to accumulator 0|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_ACCUM1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x084||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to accumulator 1|RW|0x00000000|



## **SIO: INTERP0_BASE0 Register**

**Offset** : 0x088

2.3. Processor subsystem

**52**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 49._<br>_INTERP0_BASE0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 50._<br>_INTERP0_BASE1_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 51._<br>_INTERP0_BASE2_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 52._<br>_INTERP0_POP_LANE0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 53._<br>_INTERP0_POP_LANE1_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 54._<br>_INTERP0_POP_FULL_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 55._<br>_INTERP0_PEEK_LANE_<br>_0 Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Read/write access to BASE0 register.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_BASE1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x08c||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to BASE1 register.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_BASE2 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x090||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to BASE2 register.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_POP_LANE0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x094||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read LANE0 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_POP_LANE1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x098||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read LANE1 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_POP_FULL Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x09c||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read FULL result, and simultaneously write lane results to both accumulators<br>(POP).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_PEEK_LANE0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0a0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read LANE0 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_PEEK_LANE1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0a4||||



2.3. Processor subsystem

**53**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 56._<br>_INTERP0_PEEK_LANE_<br>_1 Register_<br>_Table 57._<br>_INTERP0_PEEK_FULL_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Read LANE1 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_PEEK_FULL Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0a8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read FULL result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|RO|0x00000000|



## **SIO: INTERP0_CTRL_LANE0 Register**

**Offset** : 0x0ac

## **Description**

Control register for lane 0

|_Table 58._<br>_INTERP0_CTRL_LANE_<br>_0 Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:26|Reserved.|-|-|
||25|**OVERF**: Set if either OVERF0 or OVERF1 is set.|RO|0x0|
||24|**OVERF1**: Indicates if any masked-off MSBs in ACCUM1 are set.|RO|0x0|
||23|**OVERF0**: Indicates if any masked-off MSBs in ACCUM0 are set.|RO|0x0|
||22|Reserved.|-|-|
||21|**BLEND**: Only present on INTERP0 on each core. If BLEND mode is enabled:<br>- LANE1 result is a linear interpolation between BASE0 and BASE1, controlled<br>by the 8 LSBs of lane 1 shift and mask value (a fractional number between<br>0 and 255/256ths)<br>- LANE0 result does not have BASE0 added (yields only the 8 LSBs of lane 1<br>shift+mask value)<br>- FULL result does not have lane 1 shift+mask value added (BASE2 + lane 0<br>shift+mask)<br>LANE1 SIGNED flag controls whether the interpolation is signed or unsigned.|RW|0x0|
||20:19|**FORCE_MSB**: ORed into bits 29:28 of the lane result presented to the<br>processor on the bus.<br>No effect on the internal 32-bit datapath. Handy for using a lane to generate<br>sequence<br>of pointers into flash or SRAM.|RW|0x0|
||18|**ADD_RAW**: If 1, mask + shift is bypassed for LANE0 result. This does not<br>affect FULL result.|RW|0x0|
||17|**CROSS_RESULT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s result into this lane’s<br>accumulator on POP.|RW|0x0|
||16|**CROSS_INPUT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s accumulator into this lane’s shift<br>+ mask hardware.<br>Takes effect even if ADD_RAW is set (the CROSS_INPUT mux is before the<br>shift+mask bypass)|RW|0x0|
||15|**SIGNED**: If SIGNED is set, the shifted and masked accumulator value is sign-<br>extended to 32 bits<br>before adding to BASE0, and LANE0 PEEK/POP appear extended to 32 bits<br>when read by processor.|RW|0x0|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**54**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|14:10|**MASK_MSB**: The most-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)<br>Setting MSB < LSB may cause chip to turn inside-out|RW|0x00|
|9:5|**MASK_LSB**: The least-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)|RW|0x00|
|4:0|**SHIFT**: Logical right-shift applied to accumulator before masking|RW|0x00|



## **SIO: INTERP0_CTRL_LANE1 Register**

**Offset** : 0x0b0

## **Description**

Control register for lane 1

|_Table 59._<br>_INTERP0_CTRL_LANE_<br>_1 Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:21|Reserved.|-|-|
||20:19|**FORCE_MSB**: ORed into bits 29:28 of the lane result presented to the<br>processor on the bus.<br>No effect on the internal 32-bit datapath. Handy for using a lane to generate<br>sequence<br>of pointers into flash or SRAM.|RW|0x0|
||18|**ADD_RAW**: If 1, mask + shift is bypassed for LANE1 result. This does not<br>affect FULL result.|RW|0x0|
||17|**CROSS_RESULT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s result into this lane’s<br>accumulator on POP.|RW|0x0|
||16|**CROSS_INPUT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s accumulator into this lane’s shift<br>+ mask hardware.<br>Takes effect even if ADD_RAW is set (the CROSS_INPUT mux is before the<br>shift+mask bypass)|RW|0x0|
||15|**SIGNED**: If SIGNED is set, the shifted and masked accumulator value is sign-<br>extended to 32 bits<br>before adding to BASE1, and LANE1 PEEK/POP appear extended to 32 bits<br>when read by processor.|RW|0x0|
||14:10|**MASK_MSB**: The most-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)<br>Setting MSB < LSB may cause chip to turn inside-out|RW|0x00|
||9:5|**MASK_LSB**: The least-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)|RW|0x00|
||4:0|**SHIFT**: Logical right-shift applied to accumulator before masking|RW|0x00|



## **SIO: INTERP0_ACCUM0_ADD Register**

**Offset** : 0x0b4

|_Table 60._<br>_INTERP0_ACCUM0_AD_<br>_D Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:0|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM0<br>Reading yields lane 0’s raw shift and mask value (BASE0 not added).|RW|0x000000|



## **SIO: INTERP0_ACCUM1_ADD Register**

**Offset** : 0x0b8

2.3. Processor subsystem

**55**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 61._<br>_INTERP0_ACCUM1_AD_<br>_D Register_<br>_Table 62._<br>_INTERP0_BASE_1AND_<br>_0 Register_<br>_Table 63._<br>_INTERP1_ACCUM0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 64._<br>_INTERP1_ACCUM1_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 65._<br>_INTERP1_BASE0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 66._<br>_INTERP1_BASE1_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 67._<br>_INTERP1_BASE2_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:0|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM1<br>Reading yields lane 1’s raw shift and mask value (BASE1 not added).|RW|0x000000|
||**SIO: INTERP0_BASE_1AND0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0bc||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|On write, the lower 16 bits go to BASE0, upper bits to BASE1 simultaneously.<br>Each half is sign-extended to 32 bits if that lane’s SIGNED flag is set.|WO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_ACCUM0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0c0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to accumulator 0|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_ACCUM1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0c4||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to accumulator 1|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_BASE0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0c8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to BASE0 register.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_BASE1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0cc||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to BASE1 register.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_BASE2 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0d0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read/write access to BASE2 register.|RW|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_POP_LANE0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0d4||||



2.3. Processor subsystem

**56**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 68._<br>_INTERP1_POP_LANE0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 69._<br>_INTERP1_POP_LANE1_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 70._<br>_INTERP1_POP_FULL_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 71._<br>_INTERP1_PEEK_LANE_<br>_0 Register_<br>_Table 72._<br>_INTERP1_PEEK_LANE_<br>_1 Register_<br>_Table 73._<br>_INTERP1_PEEK_FULL_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 74._<br>_INTERP1_CTRL_LANE_<br>_0 Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Read LANE0 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_POP_LANE1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0d8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read LANE1 result, and simultaneously write lane results to both<br>accumulators (POP).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_POP_FULL Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0dc||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read FULL result, and simultaneously write lane results to both accumulators<br>(POP).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_PEEK_LANE0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0e0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read LANE0 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_PEEK_LANE1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0e4||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read LANE1 result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_PEEK_FULL Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0e8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Read FULL result, without altering any internal state (PEEK).|RO|0x00000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_CTRL_LANE0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0ec<br>**Description**<br>Control register for lane 0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:26|Reserved.|-|-|
||25|**OVERF**: Set if either OVERF0 or OVERF1 is set.|RO|0x0|
||24|**OVERF1**: Indicates if any masked-off MSBs in ACCUM1 are set.|RO|0x0|
||23|**OVERF0**: Indicates if any masked-off MSBs in ACCUM0 are set.|RO|0x0|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**57**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|22|**CLAMP**: Only present on INTERP1 on each core. If CLAMP mode is enabled:<br>- LANE0 result is shifted and masked ACCUM0, clamped by a lower bound of<br>BASE0 and an upper bound of BASE1.<br>- Signedness of these comparisons is determined by LANE0_CTRL_SIGNED|RW|0x0|
|21|Reserved.|-|-|
|20:19|**FORCE_MSB**: ORed into bits 29:28 of the lane result presented to the<br>processor on the bus.<br>No effect on the internal 32-bit datapath. Handy for using a lane to generate<br>sequence<br>of pointers into flash or SRAM.|RW|0x0|
|18|**ADD_RAW**: If 1, mask + shift is bypassed for LANE0 result. This does not<br>affect FULL result.|RW|0x0|
|17|**CROSS_RESULT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s result into this lane’s<br>accumulator on POP.|RW|0x0|
|16|**CROSS_INPUT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s accumulator into this lane’s shift<br>+ mask hardware.<br>Takes effect even if ADD_RAW is set (the CROSS_INPUT mux is before the<br>shift+mask bypass)|RW|0x0|
|15|**SIGNED**: If SIGNED is set, the shifted and masked accumulator value is sign-<br>extended to 32 bits<br>before adding to BASE0, and LANE0 PEEK/POP appear extended to 32 bits<br>when read by processor.|RW|0x0|
|14:10|**MASK_MSB**: The most-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)<br>Setting MSB < LSB may cause chip to turn inside-out|RW|0x00|
|9:5|**MASK_LSB**: The least-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)|RW|0x00|
|4:0|**SHIFT**: Logical right-shift applied to accumulator before masking|RW|0x00|



## **SIO: INTERP1_CTRL_LANE1 Register**

**Offset** : 0x0f0

## **Description**

Control register for lane 1

|_Table 75._<br>_INTERP1_CTRL_LANE_<br>_1 Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:21|Reserved.|-|-|
||20:19|**FORCE_MSB**: ORed into bits 29:28 of the lane result presented to the<br>processor on the bus.<br>No effect on the internal 32-bit datapath. Handy for using a lane to generate<br>sequence<br>of pointers into flash or SRAM.|RW|0x0|
||18|**ADD_RAW**: If 1, mask + shift is bypassed for LANE1 result. This does not<br>affect FULL result.|RW|0x0|
||17|**CROSS_RESULT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s result into this lane’s<br>accumulator on POP.|RW|0x0|



2.3. Processor subsystem

**58**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|16|**CROSS_INPUT**: If 1, feed the opposite lane’s accumulator into this lane’s shift<br>+ mask hardware.<br>Takes effect even if ADD_RAW is set (the CROSS_INPUT mux is before the<br>shift+mask bypass)|RW|0x0|
|15|**SIGNED**: If SIGNED is set, the shifted and masked accumulator value is sign-<br>extended to 32 bits<br>before adding to BASE1, and LANE1 PEEK/POP appear extended to 32 bits<br>when read by processor.|RW|0x0|
|14:10|**MASK_MSB**: The most-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)<br>Setting MSB < LSB may cause chip to turn inside-out|RW|0x00|
|9:5|**MASK_LSB**: The least-significant bit allowed to pass by the mask (inclusive)|RW|0x00|
|4:0|**SHIFT**: Logical right-shift applied to accumulator before masking|RW|0x00|



## **SIO: INTERP1_ACCUM0_ADD Register**

## **Offset** : 0x0f4

|_Table 76._<br>_INTERP1_ACCUM0_AD_<br>_D Register_<br>_Table 77._<br>_INTERP1_ACCUM1_AD_<br>_D Register_<br>_Table 78._<br>_INTERP1_BASE_1AND_<br>_0 Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:0|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM0<br>Reading yields lane 0’s raw shift and mask value (BASE0 not added).|RW|0x000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_ACCUM1_ADD Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0f8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:0|Values written here are atomically added to ACCUM1<br>Reading yields lane 1’s raw shift and mask value (BASE1 not added).|RW|0x000000|
||**SIO: INTERP1_BASE_1AND0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x0fc||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|On write, the lower 16 bits go to BASE0, upper bits to BASE1 simultaneously.<br>Each half is sign-extended to 32 bits if that lane’s SIGNED flag is set.|WO|0x00000000|



## **SIO: SPINLOCK0, SPINLOCK1, …, SPINLOCK30, SPINLOCK31 Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x100, 0x104, …, 0x178, 0x17c

_Table 79. SPINLOCK0, SPINLOCK1, …, SPINLOCK30, SPINLOCK31 Registers_

2.3. Processor subsystem

**59**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|Reading from a spinlock address will:<br>- Return 0 if lock is already locked<br>- Otherwise return nonzero, and simultaneously claim the lock<br>Writing (any value) releases the lock.<br>If core 0 and core 1 attempt to claim the same lock simultaneously, core 0<br>wins.<br>The value returned on success is 0x1 << lock number.|RW|0x00000000|



## **2.3.2. Interrupts**

Each core is equipped with a standard ARM Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC) which has 32 interrupt inputs. Each NVIC has the same interrupts routed to it, with the exception of the GPIO interrupts: there is one GPIO interrupt per bank, per core. These are completely independent, so e.g. core 0 can be interrupted by GPIO 0 in bank 0, and core 1 by GPIO 1 in the same bank.

On RP2040, only the lower 26 IRQ signals are connected on the NVIC, and IRQs 26 to 31 are tied to zero (never firing). The core can still be forced to enter the relevant interrupt handler by writing bits 26 to 31 in the NVIC ISPR register.

_Table 80. Interrupts_

|**IRQ**|**Interrupt Source**|**IRQ**|**Interrupt Source**|**IRQ**|**Interrupt Source**|**IRQ**|**Interrupt Source**|**IRQ**|**Interrupt Source**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0|TIMER_IRQ_0|6|XIP_IRQ|12|DMA_IRQ_1|18|SPI0_IRQ|24|I2C1_IRQ|
|1|TIMER_IRQ_1|7|PIO0_IRQ_0|13|IO_IRQ_BANK0|19|SPI1_IRQ|25|RTC_IRQ|
|2|TIMER_IRQ_2|8|PIO0_IRQ_1|14|IO_IRQ_QSPI|20|UART0_IRQ|||
|3|TIMER_IRQ_3|9|PIO1_IRQ_0|15|SIO_IRQ_PROC0|21|UART1_IRQ|||
|4|PWM_IRQ_WRAP|10|PIO1_IRQ_1|16|SIO_IRQ_PROC1|22|ADC_IRQ_FIFO|||
|5|USBCTRL_IRQ|11|DMA_IRQ_0|17|CLOCKS_IRQ|23|I2C0_IRQ|||



##  **NOTE**

XIP_IRQ is from the SSI block that makes up part of the XIP block. It could be used in a configuration where code is running from SRAM instead of flash. In this configuration, the XIP block could be used as a normal SSI peripheral.

Nested interrupts are supported in hardware: a lower-priority interrupt can be preempted by a higher-priority interrupt (or another exception e.g. HardFault), and the lower-priority interrupt will resume once higher-priority exceptions have completed. The priority order is determined by:

- [First, the dynamic priority level configured per interrupt by the ][NVIC_IPR0][-7 registers. The Cortex-M0+ implements] the two most significant bits of an 8-bit priority field, so four priority levels are available, and the numerically-lowest level (level 0) is the highest priority.

- [Second, for interrupts with the same dynamic priority level, the lower-numbered IRQ has higher priority (using the] IRQ numbers given in the table above).

Some care has gone into arranging the RP2040 interrupt table to give a sensible default priority ordering, but individual interrupts can be raised or lowered in priority, using NVIC_IPR0 through NVIC_IPR7, to suit a particular use case.

The 26 system IRQ signals are masked (NMI mask) and then ORed together creating the NMI signal for the core. The NMI mask for each core can be configured using PROC0_NMI_MASK and PROC1_NMI_MASK in the Syscfg register block. Each of these registers has one bit for each system interrupt, and the each core’s NMI is asserted if a system interrupt is asserted **and** the corresponding NMI mask bit is set for that core.

2.3. Processor subsystem

**60**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **CAUTION**

If the watchdog is armed, and some bits are set on the core 1 NMI mask, the RESETS block (and hence Syscfg) should be included in the watchdog reset list. Otherwise, following a watchdog event, core 1 NMI may be asserted when the core enter the bootrom. It is safe for core 0 to take an NMI when entering the bootrom (the handler will clear the NMI mask).

## **2.3.3. Event Signals**

The Cortex-M0+ can enter a sleep state until an "event" (or interrupt) takes place, using the WFE instruction. It can also generate events, using the SEV instruction. On RP2040 the event signals are cross-wired between the two processors, so that an event sent by one processor will be received on the other.

##  **NOTE**

The event flag is "sticky", so if both processors send an event (SEV) simultaneously, and then both go to sleep (WFE), they will both wake immediately, rather than getting stuck in a sleep state.

While in a WFE (or WFI) sleep state, the processor can shut off its internal clock gates, consuming much less power. When **both** processors are sleeping, and the DMA is inactive, RP2040 as a whole can enter a sleep state, disabling clocks on unused infrastructure such as the busfabric, and waking automatically when one of the processors wakes. See Section 2.11.2.

## **2.3.4. Debug**

The 2-wire Serial Wire Debug (SWD) port provides access to hardware and software debug features including:

- [Loading firmware into SRAM or external flash memory]

- [Control of processor execution: run/halt, step, set breakpoints, other standard Arm debug functionality]

- [Access to processor architectural state]

- [Access to memory and memory-mapped IO via the system bus]

The SWD bus is exposed on two dedicated pins and is immediately available after power-on.

##  **NOTE**

We recommend a max SWD frequency of 24MHz. This depends heavily on your setup. You may need to run much slower (1MHz) depending on the quality and length of your cables.

Debug access is via independent DAPs (one per core) attached to a shared multidrop SWD bus (SWD v2). Each DAP will only respond to debug commands if correctly addressed by a SWD TARGETSEL command; all others tristate their outputs. Additionally, a Rescue DP (see Section 2.3.4.2) is available which is connected to system control features. Default addresses of each debug port are given below:

- [Core 0: ][0x01002927]

- [Core 1: ][0x11002927]

- [Rescue DP: ][0xf1002927]

The Instance IDs (top 4 bits of ID above) can be changed via a sysconfig register which may be useful in a multichip application. However note that ID=0xf is reserved for the internal Rescue DP (see Section 2.3.4.2).

2.3. Processor subsystem

**61**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 10. RP2040 Debugging_

**==> picture [201 x 93] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sys_cfg.proc0_dap_instid<br>Processors<br>SWCLK SWDIO IO SWD Multidrop arbiterSWD  SWDSWD DAP_0DAP_1DP-0DP-1 APAP Core0Core1<br>SWD<br>Rescue DP<br>pam_restart sys_cfg.proc1_dap_instid<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **2.3.4.1. Software control of SWD pins**

The SWD pins for Core 0 and Core 1 can be bit-banged via registers in syscfg (see DBGFORCE). This means that Core 1 could run a USB application that allows debug of Core 0, or similar.

## **2.3.4.2. Rescue DP**

The Rescue DP (debug port) is available over the SWD bus and is only intended for use in the specific case where the chip has locked up, for example if code has been programmed into flash which permanently halts the system clock: in such a case, the normal debugger can not communicate with the processors to return the system to a working state, so more drastic action is needed. A rescue is invoked by setting the CDBGPWRUPREQ bit in the Rescue DP’s CTRL/STAT register.

This causes a hard reset of the chip (functionally similar to a power-on-reset), and sets a flag in the Chip Level Reset block to indicate that a rescue reset took place. The bootrom checks this flag almost immediately in the initial boot process (before watchdog, flash or USB boot), acknowledges by clearing the bit, then halts the processor. This leaves the system in a safe state, with the system clock running, so that the debugger can reattach to the cores and load fresh code.

For a practical example of using the Rescue DP, see the **Hardware design with RP2040** book.
