## **2.4. Cortex-M0+**

## **ARM Documentation**

Excerpted from the Cortex-M0+ Technical Reference Manual. Used with permission.

The ARM Cortex-M0+ processor is a very low gate count, highly energy efficient processor that is intended for microcontroller and deeply embedded applications that require an area optimized, low-power processor.

## **2.4.1. Features**

The ARM Cortex-M0+ processor features and benefits are:

- [Tight integration of system peripherals reduces area and development costs.]

- [Thumb instruction set combines high code density with 32-bit performance.]

- [Support for single-cycle I/O access.]

- [Power control optimization of system components.]

- [Integrated sleep modes for low-power consumption.]

- [Fast code execution enables running the processor with a slower clock or increasing sleep mode time.]

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**62**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Optimized code fetching for reduced flash and ROM power consumption.]

- [Hardware multiplier.]

- [Deterministic, high-performance interrupt handling for time-critical applications.]

- [Deterministic instruction cycle timing.]

- [Support for system level debug authentication.]

- [Serial Wire Debug reduces the number of pins required for debugging.]

## **2.4.1.1. Interfaces**

The interfaces included in the processor for external access include:

- [External AHB-Lite interface to busfabric]

- [Debug Access Port (DAP)]

- [Single-cycle I/O Port to SIO peripherals]

## **2.4.1.2. Configuration**

Each processor is configured with the following features:

- [Architectural clock gating (for power saving)]

- [Little Endian bus access]

- [Four Breakpoints]

- [Debug support (via 2-wire debug pins ][SWD][/][SWCLK][)]

- [32-bit instruction fetch (to match 32-bit data bus)]

- [IOPORT (for low latency access to local peripherals (see ][SIO][)]

- [26 interrupts]

- [8 MPU regions]

- [All registers reset on powerup]

- [Fast multiplier (MULS 32×32 single cycle)]

- [SysTick timer]

- [Vector Table Offset Register (][VTOR][)]

- [34 WIC (Wake-up Interrupt Controller) lines (32 IRQ and NMI, RXEV)]

- [DAP feature: Halt event support]

- [DAP feature: SerialWire debug interface (protocol 2 with multidrop support)]

- [DAP feature: Micro Trace Buffer (MTB) is not implemented]

Architectural clock gating allows the processor core to support SLEEP and DEEPSLEEP power states by disabling the clock to parts of the processor core. Note that power gating is not supported.

Each M0+ core has its own interrupt controller which can individually mask out interrupt sources as required. The same interrupts are routed to both M0+ cores.

## **2.4.1.3. ARM architecture**

The processor implements the ARMv6-M architecture profile. See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual, and for

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**63**

RP2040 Datasheet

further details refer to the ARM Cortex M0+ Technical Reference Manual.

## **2.4.2. Functional Description**

## **2.4.2.1. Overview**

The Cortex-M0+ processor is a configurable, multistage, 32-bit RISC processor. It has an AMBA AHB-Lite interface and includes an NVIC component. It also has hardware debug, single-cycle I/O interfacing, and memory-protection functionality. The processor can execute Thumb code and is compatible with other Cortex-M profile processors.

Figure 11 shows the functional blocks of the processor and surrounding blocks.

_Figure 11. Cortex M0+ Functional block diagram_

**==> picture [297 x 143] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Cortex-M0+ subsystem<br>HCLK AHB-Lite Master<br>Clock PMU DCLKFCLK Cortex M0+ Core MPU Bus Interface Single cycle IO Port<br>Reset<br>RESET CTRL<br>NVIC watchpoint unitBreakpoint and  Debugger interface<br>Interrupts WIC DAP Serial Wire Debug<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **2.4.2.2. Features**

The M0+ features:

- [The ARMv6-M Thumb® instruction set.]

- [Thumb-2 technology.]

- [An ARMv6-M compliant 24-bit SysTick timer.]

- [A 32-bit hardware multiplier. This is the standard single-cycle multiplier]

- [The ability to have deterministic, fixed-latency, interrupt handling.]

- [Load/store multiple instructions that can be abandoned and restarted to facilitate rapid interrupt handling.]

- [C Application Binary Interface compliant exception model. This is the ARMv6-M, C Application Binary Interface (C-] ABI) compliant exception model that enables the use of pure C functions as interrupt handlers.

- [Low power sleep-mode entry using Wait For Interrupt (WFI), Wait For Event (WFE) instructions, or the return from] interrupt sleep-on-exit feature.

## **2.4.2.3. NVIC features**

The Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC) features are:

- [26 external interrupt inputs, each with four levels of priority.]

- [Dedicated Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI) input (which can be driven from any standard interrupt source)]

- [Support for both level-sensitive and pulse-sensitive interrupt lines.]

- [Wake-up Interrupt Controller (WIC), providing ultra-low power sleep mode support.]

- [Relocatable vector table.]

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**64**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

The NVIC supports hardware nesting of exceptions, e.g. an interrupt handler may itself be interrupted if a higherpriority interrupt request arrives whilst the handler is running.

Further details available in Section 2.4.5.

## **2.4.2.4. Debug features**

Debug features are:

- [Four hardware breakpoints.]

- [Two watchpoints.]

- [Program Counter Sampling Register (PCSR) for non-intrusive code profiling.]

- [Single step and vector catch capabilities.]

- [Support for unlimited software breakpoints using BKPT instruction.]

- [Non-intrusive access to core peripherals and zero-waitstate system slaves through a compact bus matrix. A] debugger can access these devices, including memory, even when the processor is running.

- [Full access to core registers when the processor is halted.]

- [CoreSight compliant debug access through a Debug Access Port (DAP) supporting Serial Wire debug connections.]

## **2.4.2.4.1. Debug Access Port**

The processor is implemented with a low gate count Debug Access Port (DAP). The low gate count Debug Access Port (DAP) provides a Serial Wire debug-port, and connects to the processor slave port to provide full system-level debug access. For more information on DAP, see the ADI v5.1 version of the ARM Debug Interface v5, Architecture Specification

## **2.4.2.5. MPU features**

Memory Protection Unit (MPU) features are:

- [Eight user-configurable memory regions.]

- [Eight sub-region disables per region.]

- [Execute never (XN) support.]

- [Default memory map support.]

Further details available in Section 2.4.6.

## **2.4.2.6. AHB-Lite interface**

Transactions on the AHB-Lite interface are always marked as non-sequential. Processor accesses and debug accesses share the external interface to external AHB peripherals. The processor accesses take priority over debug accesses. Any vendor-specific components can populate this bus.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**65**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

Instructions are only fetched using the AHB-Lite interface. To optimize performance, the Cortex-M0+ processor fetches ahead of the instruction it is executing. To minimize power consumption, the fetch ahead is limited to a maximum of 32 bits.

## **2.4.2.7. Single-cycle I/O port**

The processor implements a single-cycle I/O port that provides high speed access to tightly-coupled peripherals, such as general-purpose-I/O (GPIO). The port is accessible both by loads and stores from either the processor or the debugger. You cannot execute code from the I/O port.

## **2.4.2.8. Power Management Unit**

Each processor has its own Power Management Unit (PMU) which allows power saving by turning off clocks to parts of the processor core. There are no separate power domains on RP2040.

The PMU runs from the processor clock which is controlled from the chip level clocks block. The PMU can control the following clock domains within the processor:

- [A debug clock containing the processor debug resources and the rest of the DAP.]

- [A system clock containing the NVIC.]

- [A processor clock containing the core and associated interfaces]

Control is limited to clock enable/disable. When enabled, all domains run at the same clock speed.

The PMU also interfaces with the WIC, to ensure that power-down and wake-up behaviours are transparent to software and work with clocking and sleeping requirements. This includes SLEEP or DEEPSLEEP support as controlled in SCR register.

## **2.4.2.8.1. Power Management**

RP2040 ARM Cortex M0+ uses ARMv6-M which supports the use of Wait For Interrupt (WFI) and Wait For Event (WFE) instructions as part of system power management:

WFI provides a mechanism for hardware support of entry to one or more sleep states. Hardware can suspend execution until a wakeup event occurs.

WFE provides a mechanism for software to suspend program execution until a wakeup condition occurs with minimal or no impact on wakeup latency. Both WFI and WFE are hint instructions that might have no effect on program execution. Normally, they are used in software idle loops that resume program execution only after an interrupt or event of interest occurs.

## **NOTE**

Code using WFE and WFI must handle any spurious wakeup events caused by a debug halt or other reasons.

Refer to the SDK and ARMv6-M guide for further information.

## **2.4.2.8.2. Wait For Event and Send Event**

RP2040 can support software-based synchronization to system events using the Send-Event (SEV) and WFE hint instructions. Software can:

- [use the ][WFE][ instruction to indicate that it is able to suspend execution of a process or thread until an event occurs,] permitting hardware to enter a low power state.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**66**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [rely on a mechanism that is transparent to software and provides low latency wakeup.]

The WFE mechanism relies on hardware and software working together to achieve energy saving. For example, stalling execution of a processor until a device or another processor has set a flag:

- [the hardware provides the mechanism to enter the ][WFE][ low-power state.]

- [software enters a polling loop to determine when the flag is set:]

- [the polling processor issues a ][WFE][ instruction as part of a polling loop if the flag is clear.]

- [an event is generated (hardware interrupt or Send-Event instruction from another processor) when the flag is set.]

## WFE **wake up events**

The following events are WFE wake up events:

- [the execution of an ][SEV][ instruction on the other processor]

- [any exception entering the pending state if SEVONPEND in the System Control Register is set to 1.]

- [an asynchronous exception at a priority that preempts any currently active exceptions.]

- [a debug event with debug enabled.]

## **The Event Register**

The Event Register is a single bit register. When set, an Event Register indicates that an event has occurred, since the register was last cleared, that might prevent the processor having to suspend operation on issuing a WFE instruction. The following conditions apply to the Event Register:

- [A reset clears the Event Register.]

- [Any ][WFE][ wakeup event, or the execution of an exception return instruction, sets the Event Register.]

- [A ][WFE][ instruction clears the Event Register.]

- [Software cannot read or write the value of the Event Register directly.]

## **The Send-Event instruction**

The Send-Event (SEV) instruction causes an event to be signalled to the other processor. The Send-Event instruction generates a wakeup event.

## **The Wait For Event instruction**

The action of the WFE instruction depends on the state of the Event Register:

- [If the Event Register is set, the instruction clears the register and returns immediately.]

- [If the Event Register is clear the processor can suspend execution and enter a low-power state. It can remain in] that state until the processor detects a WFE wakeup event or a reset. When the processor detects a WFE wakeup event, the WFE instruction completes.

WFE wakeup events can occur before a WFE instruction is issued. Software using the WFE mechanism must tolerate spurious wake up events, including multiple wakeups.

## **2.4.2.8.3. Wait For Interrupt**

RP2040 supports Wait For Interrupt through the hint instruction, WFI.

When a processor issues a WFI instruction it can suspend execution and enter a low-power state. It can remain in that state until the processor detects one of the following WFI wake up events:

- [A reset.]

- [An asynchronous exception at a priority that, if PRIMASK.PM was set to 0, would preempt any currently active] exceptions.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**67**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Note**

If PRIMASK.PM is set to 1, an asynchronous exception that has a higher group priority than any active exception results in a WFI instruction exit. If the group priority of the exception is less than or equal to the execution group priority, the exception is ignored.

- [If debug is enabled, a debug event.]

- [A ][WFI][ wakeup event.]

The WFI instruction completes when the hardware detects a WFI wake up event.

The processor recognizes WFI wake up events only after issuing the WFI instruction.

## **2.4.2.8.4. Wakeup Interrupt Controller**

The Wakeup Interrupt Controller (WIC) is used to wake the processor from a DEEPSLEEP state as controlled by the SCR register. In a DEEPSLEEP state clocks to the processor core and NVIC are not running. It can take a few cycles to wake from a DEEPSLEEP state.

The WIC takes inputs from the receive event signal (from the other processor), 32 interrupts lines, and NMI.

For more power saving, RP2040 supports system level power saving modes as defined in Section 2.11 which also includes code examples.

## **2.4.2.9. Reset Control**

The Cortex M0+ Reset Control block controls the following resets:

- [Debug reset]

- [M0+ core reset]

- [PMU reset]

After power up, both processors are released from reset (see details in Section 2.13.2). This releases reset to Debug, M0+ core and PMU.

Once running, resets can be triggered from the Debugger, NVIC (using AIRCR.SYSRESETREQ), or the RP2040 Power On State Machine controller (see details in Section 2.13). The NVIC only resets the Cortex-M0+ processor core (not the Debug or PMU), whereas the Power On State Machine controller can reset the processor subsystem which asserts all resets in the subsystem (Debug, M0+ core, PMU).

## **2.4.3. Programmer’s model**

## **2.4.3.1. About the programmer’s model**

The ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual provides a complete description of the programmer’s model. This chapter gives an overview of the Cortex-M0+ programmer’s model that describes the implementation-defined options. It also contains the ARMv6-M Thumb instructions it uses and their cycle counts for the processor. Additional details are in following chapters

- [Section 2.4.4][ summarizes the system control features of the programmer’s model.]

- [Section 2.4.5][ summarizes the NVIC features of the programmer’s model.]

- [Section 2.3.4][ summarizes the Debug features of the programmer’s model.]

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**68**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.4.3.2. Modes of operation and execution**

See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for information about the modes of operation and execution.

## **2.4.3.3. Instruction set summary**

The processor implements the ARMv6-M Thumb instruction set, including a number of 32-bit instructions that use Thumb-2 technology. The ARMv6-M instruction set comprises:

- [All of the 16-bit Thumb instructions from ARMv7-M excluding CBZ, CBNZ and IT.]

- [The 32-bit Thumb instructions BL, DMB, DSB, ISB, MRS and MSR.]

Table 81 shows the Cortex-M0+ instructions and their cycle counts. The cycle counts are based on a system with zero wait-states.

_Table 81. Cortex-M0+ instruction summary_

|**Operation**|**Description**|**Assembler**|**Cycles**|
|---|---|---|---|
|Move|8-bit immediate|MOVS Rd, #<imm>|1|
||Lo to Lo|MOVS Rd, Rm|1|
||Any to Any|MOV Rd, Rm|1|
||Any to PC|MOV PC, Rm|2|
|Add|3-bit immediate|ADDS Rd, Rn, #<imm>|1|
||All registers Lo|ADDS Rd, Rn, Rm|1|
||Any to Any|ADD Rd, Rd, Rm|1|
||Any to PC|ADD PC, PC, Rm|2|
||8-bit immediate|ADDS Rd, Rd, #<imm>|1|
||With carry|ADCS Rd, Rd, Rm|1|
||Immediate to SP|ADD SP, SP, #<imm>|1|
||Form address from SP|ADD Rd, SP, #<imm>|1|
||Form address from PC|ADR Rd, <label>|1|
|Subtract|Lo and Lo|SUBS Rd, Rn, Rm|1|
||3-bit immediate|SUBS Rd, Rn, #<imm>|1|
||8-bit immediate|SUBS Rd, Rd, #<imm>|1|
||With carry|SBCS Rd, Rd, Rm|1|
||Immediate from SP|SUB SP, SP, #<imm>|1|
||Negate|RSBS Rd, Rn, #0|1|
|Multiply|Multiply|MULS Rd, Rm, Rd|1|
|Compare|Compare|CMP Rn, Rm|1|
||Negative|CMN Rn, Rm|1|
||Immediate|CMP Rn, #<imm>|1|
|Logical|AND|ANDS Rd, Rd, Rm|1|
||Exclusive OR|EORS Rd, Rd, Rm|1|
||OR|ORRS Rd, Rd, Rm|1|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**69**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Operation**|**Description**|**Assembler**|**Cycles**|
|---|---|---|---|
||Bit clear|BICS Rd, Rd, Rm|1|
||Move NOT|MVNS Rd, Rm|1|
||AND test|TST Rn, Rm|1|
|Shift|Logical shift left by immediate|LSLS Rd, Rm, #<shift>|1|
||Logical shift left by register|LSLS Rd, Rd, Rs|1|
||Logical shift right by immediate|LSRS Rd, Rm, #<shift>|1|
||Logical shift right by register|LSRS Rd, Rd, Rs|1|
||Arithmetic shift right|ASRS Rd, Rm, #<shift>|1|
||Arithmetic shift right by register|ASRS Rd, Rd, Rs|1|
|Rotate|Rotate right by register|RORS Rd, Rd, Rs|1|
|Load|Word, immediate offset|LDR Rd, [Rn, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Halfword, immediate offset|LDRH Rd, [Rn, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Byte, immediate offset|LDRB Rd, [Rn, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Word, register offset|LDR Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||Halfword, register offset|LDRH Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||Signed halfword, register offset|LDRSH Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||Byte, register offset|LDRB Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||Signed byte, register offset|LDRSB Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||PC-relative|LDR Rd, <label>|2 or 1a|
||SP-relative|LDR Rd, [SP, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Multiple, excluding base|LDM Rn!, {<loreglist>}|1+Nb|
||Multiple, including base|LDM Rn, {<loreglist>}|1+Nb|
|Store|Word, immediate offset|STR Rd, [Rn, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Halfword, immediate offset|STRH Rd, [Rn, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Byte, immediate offset|STRB Rd, [Rn, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Word, register offset|STR Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||Halfword, register offset|STRH Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||Byte, register offset|STRB Rd, [Rn, Rm]|2 or 1a|
||SP-relative|STR Rd, [SP, #<imm>]|2 or 1a|
||Multiple|STM Rn!, {<loreglist>}|1+Nb|
|Push|Push|PUSH {<loreglist>}|1+Nb|
||Push with link register|PUSH {<loreglist>, LR}|1+Nc|
|Pop|Pop|POP {<loreglist>}|1+Nb|
||Pop and return|POP {<loreglist>, PC}|3+Nc|
|Branch|Conditional|B<cc> <label>|1 or 2d|
||Unconditional|B <label>|2|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**70**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Operation**|**Description**|**Assembler**|**Cycles**|
|---|---|---|---|
||With link|BL <label>|3|
||With exchange|BX Rm|2|
||With link and exchange|BLX Rm|2|
|Extend|Signed halfword to word|SXTH Rd, Rm|1|
||Signed byte to word|SXTB Rd, Rm|1|
||Unsigned halfword|UXTH Rd, Rm|1|
||Unsigned byte|UXTB Rd, Rm|1|
|Reverse|Bytes in word|REV Rd, Rm|1|
||Bytes in both halfwords|REV16 Rd, Rm|1|
||Signed bottom half word|REVSH Rd, Rm|1|
|State|change Supervisor Call|SVC #<imm>|-e|
||Disable interrupts|CPSID i|1|
||Enable interrupts|CPSIE i|1|
||Read special register|MRS Rd, <specreg>|3|
||Write special register|MSR <specreg>, Rn|3|
||Breakpoint|BKPT #<imm>|-e|
|Hint|Send-Event|SEV|1|
||Wait For Event|WFE|2f|
||Wait For Interrupt|WFI|2f|
||Yield|YIELD|1f|
||No operation|NOP|1|
|Barriers|Instruction synchronization|ISB|3|
||Data memory|DMB|3|
||Data synchronization|DSB|3|



## **Table Notes**

a 2 if to AHB interface or SCS, 1 if to single-cycle I/O port.

b N is the number of elements in the list.

c N is the number of elements in the list including PC or LR.

d 2 if taken, 1 if not-taken.

e Cycle count depends on processor and debug configuration.

f Excludes time spent waiting for an interrupt or event.

g Executes as NOP.

See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information about the ARMv6-M Thumb instructions.

## **2.4.3.4. Memory model**

The processor contains a bus matrix that arbitrates the processor core and Debug Access Port (DAP) memory accesses to both the external memory system and to the internal NVIC and debug components.

Priority is always given to the processor to ensure that any debug accesses are as non-intrusive as possible. For a zero

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**71**

RP2040 Datasheet

wait-state system, all debug accesses to system memory, NVIC, and debug resources are completely non-intrusive for typical code execution.

The system memory map is ARMv6-M architecture compliant, and is common both to the debugger and processor accesses. Transactions are routed as follows:

- [All accesses below ][0xd0000000][ or above ][0xefffffff][ appear as AHB-Lite transactions on the AHB-Lite master port of] the processor.

- [Accesses in the range ][0xd0000000][ to ][0xdfffffff][ are handled by the SIO.]

- [Accesses in the range ][0xe0000000][ to ][0xefffffff][ are handled within the processor and do not appear on the AHB-Lite] master port of the processor.

The processor supports only word size accesses in the range 0xd0000000 - 0xefffffff.

Table 82 shows the code, data, and device suitability for each region of the default memory map. This is the memory map used by implementations when the MPU is disabled. The attributes and permissions of all regions, except that targeting the Cortex-M0+ NVIC and debug components, can be modified using an implemented MPU.

|_Table 82. M0+ Default_<br>_memory map usage_|**Address range**|**Code**|**Data**|**Device**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||0xf0000000-0xffffffff|No|No|Yes|
||0xe0000000-0xefffffff|No|No|Noa|
||0xa0000000-0xdfffffff|No|No|Yes|
||0x60000000-0x9fffffff|Yes|Yes|No|
||0x40000000-0x5fffffff|No|No|Yes|
||0x20000000-0x3fffffff|Yes|Yes|No|
||0x00000000-0x1fffffff|Yes|Yes|No|



a. Space reserved for Cortex-M0+ NVIC and debug components.

## **Note**

Regions not marked as suitable for code behave as eXecute-Never (XN) and generate a HardFault exception if code attempts to execute from this location.

See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information about the memory model.

## **2.4.3.5. Processor core registers summary**

Table 83 shows the processor core register set summary. Each of these registers is 32 bits wide.

|_Table 83. M0+_<br>_processor core_<br>_register set summary_|**Name**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||R0-R12|R0-R12 are general-purpose registers for data operations.|
||MSP/PSP (R13)|The Stack Pointer (SP) is register R13. In Thread mode,<br>the CONTROL register indicates the stack pointer to use,<br>Main Stack Pointer (MSP) or Process Stack Pointer (PSP).|
||LR (R14)|The Link Register (LR) is register R14. It stores the return<br>information for subroutines, function calls, and<br>exceptions.|
||PC (R15)|The Program Counter (PC) is register R15. It contains the<br>current program address.|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**72**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Name**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|PSR|The Program Status Register (PSR) combines:<br>• Application Program Status Register (APSR).<br>• Interrupt Program Status Register (IPSR).<br>• Execution Program Status Register (EPSR).<br>These registers provide different views of the PSR.|
|PRIMASK|The PRIMASK register prevents activation of all<br>exceptions with configurable priority.|
|CONTROL|The CONTROL register controls the stack used, the code<br>privilege level, when the processor is in Thread mode.|



## **Note**

See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for information about the processor core registers and their addresses, access types, and reset values.

## **2.4.3.6. Exceptions**

This section describes the exception model of the processor.

## **2.4.3.6.1. Exception handling**

The processor implements advanced exception and interrupt handling, as described in the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual. To minimize interrupt latency, the processor abandons any load-multiple or store-multiple instruction to take any pending interrupt. On return from the interrupt handler, the processor restarts the load-multiple or storemultiple instruction from the beginning.

This means that software must not use load-multiple or store-multiple instructions when a device is accessed in a memory region that is read-sensitive or sensitive to repeated writes. The software must not use these instructions in any case where repeated reads or writes might cause inconsistent results or unwanted side-effects.

The processor implementation can ensure that a fixed number of cycles are required for the NVIC to detect an interrupt signal and the processor fetch the first instruction of the associated interrupt handler. If this is done, the highest priority interrupt is jitter-free. This will depend on where the interrupt handler is located and if another higher priority master is accessing that memory. SRAM4 and SRAM5 are provided that may be allocated to interrupt handlers for each processor so this is jitter-free.

To reduce interrupt latency and jitter, the Cortex-M0+ processor implements both interrupt late-arrival and interrupt tailchaining mechanisms, as defined by the ARMv6-M architecture. The worst case interrupt latency, for the highest priority active interrupt in a zero wait-state system not using jitter suppression, is 15 cycles.

The processor exception model has the following implementation-defined behaviour in addition to the architecture specified behaviour:

- [Exceptions on stacking from HardFault to NMI lockup at NMI priority.]

- [Exceptions on unstacking from NMI to HardFault lockup at HardFault priority.]

## **2.4.4. System control**

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**73**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.4.4.1. System control register summary**

Table 84 gives the system control registers. Each of these registers is 32 bits wide.

_Table 84. M0+ System control registers_

|**Name**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|SYST_CSR|SysTick Control and Status Register|
|SYST_RVR|SysTick Reload Value Register|
|SYST_CVR|SysTick Current Value Register|
|SYST_CALIB|SysTick Calibration value Register|
|CPUID|SeeCPUIDRegister|
|ICSR|Interrupt Control State Register|
|AIRCR|Application Interrupt and Reset Control Register|
|CCR|Configuration and Control Register|
|SHPR2|System Handler Priority Register|
|SHPR3|System Handler Priority Register|
|SHCSR|System Handler Control and State Register|
|VTOR|Vector table Offset Register|
|ACTLR|Auxiliary Control Register|



## **Note**

- [All system control registers are only accessible using word transfers. Any attempt to read or write a halfword] or byte is Unpredictable.

- [See the List of Registers or ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information about the system] control registers, and their addresses and access types, and reset values.

## **2.4.4.1.1. CPUID Register**

The CPUID contains the part number, version, and implementation information that is specific to the processor.

##  **IMPORTANT**

This standard internal Arm register contains information about the type of processor. It should not be confused with CPUID (Section 2.3.1.1), an RP2040 SIO register which reads as 0 on core 0 and 1 on core 1.

## **2.4.5. NVIC**

## **2.4.5.1. About the NVIC**

External interrupt signals connect to the Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC), and the NVIC prioritizes the interrupts. Software can set the priority of each interrupt. The NVIC and the Cortex-M0+ processor core are closely coupled, providing low latency interrupt processing and efficient processing of late arriving interrupts.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**74**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

"Nested" refers to the fact that interrupts can themselves be interrupted, by higher-priority interrupts. "Vectored" refers to the hardware dispatching each interrupt to a distinct handler routine, specified by the vector table. Details of nesting and vectoring behaviour are given in the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual.

All NVIC registers are only accessible using word transfers. Any attempt to read or write a halfword or byte individually is unpredictable.

NVIC registers are always little-endian.

Processor exception handling is described in Exceptions section.

## **2.4.5.1.1. SysTick timer**

A 24-bit SysTick system timer, extends the functionality of both the processor and the NVIC and provides:

- [A 24-bit system timer (SysTick).]

- [Additional configurable priority SysTick interrupt.]

The SysTick timer uses a 1μs pulse as a clock enable. This is generated in the watchdog block as timer_tick. Accuracy of SysTick timing depends upon accuracy of this timer_tick. The SysTick timer can also run from the system clock (see SYST_CALIB).

See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information.

## **2.4.5.1.2. Low power modes**

The implementation includes a WIC. This enables the processor and NVIC to be put into a very low-power sleep mode leaving the WIC to identify and prioritize interrupts.

The processor fully implements the Wait For Interrupt (WFI), Wait For Event (WFE) and the Send Event (SEV) instructions. In addition, the processor also supports the use of SLEEPONEXIT, that causes the processor core to enter sleep mode when it returns from an exception handler to Thread mode. See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information.

## **2.4.5.2. NVIC register summary**

Table 85 shows the NVIC registers. Each of these registers is 32 bits wide.

|_Table 85. M0+ NVIC_<br>_registers_|**Name**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||NVIC_ISER|Interrupt Set-Enable Register.|
||NVIC_ICER|Interrupt Clear-Enable Register.|
||NVIC_ISPR|Interrupt Set-Pending Register.|
||NVIC_ICPR|Interrupt Clear-Pending Register.|
||NVIC_IPR0-NVIC_IPR7|Interrupt Priority Registers.|



## **Note**

See the List of Registers or ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information about the NVIC registers and their addresses, access types, and reset values.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**75**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.4.6. MPU**

## **2.4.6.1. About the MPU**

The MPU is a component for memory protection which allows the processor to support the ARMv6 Protected Memory System Architecture model. The MPU provides full support for:

- [Eight unified protection regions.]

- [Overlapping protection regions, with ascending region priority:]

   - [7 = highest priority.]

   - [0 = lowest priority.]

- [Access permissions.]

- [Exporting memory attributes to the system.]

MPU mismatches and permission violations invoke the HardFault handler. See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information.

You can use the MPU to:

- [Enforce privilege rules.]

- [Separate processes.]

- [Manage memory attributes.]

## **2.4.6.2. MPU register summary**

Table 86 shows the MPU registers. Each of these registers is 32 bits wide.

_Table 86. M0+ MPU registers_

|**Name**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|MPU_TYPE|MPU Type Register.|
|MPU_CTRL|MPU Control Register.|
|MPU_RNR|MPU Region Number Register.|
|MPU_RBAR|MPU Region Base Address Register.|
|MPU_RASR|MPU Region Attribute and Size Register.|



## **Note**

- [See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual for more information about the MPU registers and their] addresses, access types, and reset values.

- [The MPU supports region sizes from 256-bytes to 4Gb, with 8-sub regions per region.]

## **2.4.7. Debug**

Basic debug functionality includes processor halt, single-step, processor core register access, Reset and HardFault Vector Catch, unlimited software breakpoints, and full system memory access. See the ARMv6-M Architecture Reference Manual.

The debug features for this device are:

- [A breakpoint unit supporting 4 hardware breakpoints.]

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**76**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [A watchpoint unit supporting 2 watchpoints.]

## **2.4.8. List of Registers**

The ARM Cortex-M0+ registers start at a base address of 0xe0000000 (defined as PPB_BASE in SDK).

|_Table 87. List of_<br>_M0PLUS registers_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0xe010|SYST_CSR|SysTick Control and Status Register|
||0xe014|SYST_RVR|SysTick Reload Value Register|
||0xe018|SYST_CVR|SysTick Current Value Register|
||0xe01c|SYST_CALIB|SysTick Calibration Value Register|
||0xe100|NVIC_ISER|Interrupt Set-Enable Register|
||0xe180|NVIC_ICER|Interrupt Clear-Enable Register|
||0xe200|NVIC_ISPR|Interrupt Set-Pending Register|
||0xe280|NVIC_ICPR|Interrupt Clear-Pending Register|
||0xe400|NVIC_IPR0|Interrupt Priority Register 0|
||0xe404|NVIC_IPR1|Interrupt Priority Register 1|
||0xe408|NVIC_IPR2|Interrupt Priority Register 2|
||0xe40c|NVIC_IPR3|Interrupt Priority Register 3|
||0xe410|NVIC_IPR4|Interrupt Priority Register 4|
||0xe414|NVIC_IPR5|Interrupt Priority Register 5|
||0xe418|NVIC_IPR6|Interrupt Priority Register 6|
||0xe41c|NVIC_IPR7|Interrupt Priority Register 7|
||0xed00|CPUID|CPUID Base Register|
||0xed04|ICSR|Interrupt Control and State Register|
||0xed08|VTOR|Vector Table Offset Register|
||0xed0c|AIRCR|Application Interrupt and Reset Control Register|
||0xed10|SCR|System Control Register|
||0xed14|CCR|Configuration and Control Register|
||0xed1c|SHPR2|System Handler Priority Register 2|
||0xed20|SHPR3|System Handler Priority Register 3|
||0xed24|SHCSR|System Handler Control and State Register|
||0xed90|MPU_TYPE|MPU Type Register|
||0xed94|MPU_CTRL|MPU Control Register|
||0xed98|MPU_RNR|MPU Region Number Register|
||0xed9c|MPU_RBAR|MPU Region Base Address Register|
||0xeda0|MPU_RASR|MPU Region Attribute and Size Register|



## **M0PLUS: SYST_CSR Register**

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**77**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Offset** : 0xe010

## **Description**

Use the SysTick Control and Status Register to enable the SysTick features.

_Table 88. SYST_CSR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:17|Reserved.|-|-|
|16|**COUNTFLAG**: Returns 1 if timer counted to 0 since last time this was read.<br>Clears on read by application or debugger.|RO|0x0|
|15:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**CLKSOURCE**: SysTick clock source. Always reads as one if SYST_CALIB<br>reports NOREF.<br>Selects the SysTick timer clock source:<br>0 = External reference clock.<br>1 = Processor clock.|RW|0x0|
|1|**TICKINT**: Enables SysTick exception request:<br>0 = Counting down to zero does not assert the SysTick exception request.<br>1 = Counting down to zero to asserts the SysTick exception request.|RW|0x0|
|0|**ENABLE**: Enable SysTick counter:<br>0 = Counter disabled.<br>1 = Counter enabled.|RW|0x0|



## **M0PLUS: SYST_RVR Register**

## **Offset** : 0xe014

## **Description**

Use the SysTick Reload Value Register to specify the start value to load into the current value register when the counter reaches 0. It can be any value between 0 and 0x00FFFFFF. A start value of 0 is possible, but has no effect because the SysTick interrupt and COUNTFLAG are activated when counting from 1 to 0. The reset value of this register is UNKNOWN.

To generate a multi-shot timer with a period of N processor clock cycles, use a RELOAD value of N-1. For example, if the SysTick interrupt is required every 100 clock pulses, set RELOAD to 99.

|_Table 89. SYST_RVR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:0|**RELOAD**: Value to load into the SysTick Current Value Register when the<br>counter reaches 0.|RW|0x000000|



## **M0PLUS: SYST_CVR Register**

**Offset** : 0xe018

## **Description**

Use the SysTick Current Value Register to find the current value in the register. The reset value of this register is UNKNOWN.

|_Table 90. SYST_CVR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**78**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|23:0|**CURRENT**: Reads return the current value of the SysTick counter. This register<br>is write-clear. Writing to it with any value clears the register to 0. Clearing this<br>register also clears the COUNTFLAG bit of the SysTick Control and Status<br>Register.|RW|0x000000|



## **M0PLUS: SYST_CALIB Register**

**Offset** : 0xe01c

## **Description**

Use the SysTick Calibration Value Register to enable software to scale to any required speed using divide and multiply.

_Table 91. SYST_CALIB Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31|**NOREF**: If reads as 1, the Reference clock is not provided - the CLKSOURCE bit<br>of the SysTick Control and Status register will be forced to 1 and cannot be<br>cleared to 0.|RO|0x0|
|30|**SKEW**: If reads as 1, the calibration value for 10ms is inexact (due to clock<br>frequency).|RO|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:0|**TENMS**: An optional Reload value to be used for 10ms (100Hz) timing, subject<br>to system clock skew errors. If the value reads as 0, the calibration value is not<br>known.|RO|0x000000|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_ISER Register**

**Offset** : 0xe100

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Set-Enable Register to enable interrupts and determine which interrupts are currently enabled. If a pending interrupt is enabled, the NVIC activates the interrupt based on its priority. If an interrupt is not enabled, asserting its interrupt signal changes the interrupt state to pending, but the NVIC never activates the interrupt, regardless of its priority.

_Table 92. NVIC_ISER Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|**SETENA**: Interrupt set-enable bits.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Enable interrupt.<br>Read:<br>0 = Interrupt disabled.<br>1 = Interrupt enabled.|RW|0x00000000|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_ICER Register**

**Offset** : 0xe180

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Clear-Enable Registers to disable interrupts and determine which interrupts are currently enabled.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**79**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 93. NVIC_ICER Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|**CLRENA**: Interrupt clear-enable bits.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Disable interrupt.<br>Read:<br>0 = Interrupt disabled.<br>1 = Interrupt enabled.|RW|0x00000000|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_ISPR Register**

**Offset** : 0xe200

## **Description**

The NVIC_ISPR forces interrupts into the pending state, and shows which interrupts are pending.

_Table 94. NVIC_ISPR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|**SETPEND**: Interrupt set-pending bits.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Changes interrupt state to pending.<br>Read:<br>0 = Interrupt is not pending.<br>1 = Interrupt is pending.<br>Note: Writing 1 to the NVIC_ISPR bit corresponding to:<br>An interrupt that is pending has no effect.<br>A disabled interrupt sets the state of that interrupt to pending.|RW|0x00000000|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_ICPR Register**

**Offset** : 0xe280

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Clear-Pending Register to clear pending interrupts and determine which interrupts are currently pending.

_Table 95. NVIC_ICPR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|**CLRPEND**: Interrupt clear-pending bits.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Removes pending state and interrupt.<br>Read:<br>0 = Interrupt is not pending.<br>1 = Interrupt is pending.|RW|0x00000000|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR0 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe400

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

Note: Writing 1 to an NVIC_ICPR bit does not affect the active state of the corresponding interrupt. These registers are only word-accessible

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**80**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 96. NVIC_IPR0 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**IP_3**: Priority of interrupt 3|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**IP_2**: Priority of interrupt 2|RW|0x0|
|21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:14|**IP_1**: Priority of interrupt 1|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:6|**IP_0**: Priority of interrupt 0|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR1 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe404

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

_Table 97. NVIC_IPR1 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**IP_7**: Priority of interrupt 7|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**IP_6**: Priority of interrupt 6|RW|0x0|
|21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:14|**IP_5**: Priority of interrupt 5|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:6|**IP_4**: Priority of interrupt 4|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR2 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe408

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

_Table 98. NVIC_IPR2 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**IP_11**: Priority of interrupt 11|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**IP_10**: Priority of interrupt 10|RW|0x0|
|21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:14|**IP_9**: Priority of interrupt 9|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**81**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|7:6|**IP_8**: Priority of interrupt 8|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR3 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe40c

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

_Table 99. NVIC_IPR3 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**IP_15**: Priority of interrupt 15|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**IP_14**: Priority of interrupt 14|RW|0x0|
|21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:14|**IP_13**: Priority of interrupt 13|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:6|**IP_12**: Priority of interrupt 12|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR4 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe410

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

_Table 100. NVIC_IPR4 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**IP_19**: Priority of interrupt 19|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**IP_18**: Priority of interrupt 18|RW|0x0|
|21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:14|**IP_17**: Priority of interrupt 17|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:6|**IP_16**: Priority of interrupt 16|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR5 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe414

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**82**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

|_Table 101. NVIC_IPR5_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|**IP_23**: Priority of interrupt 23|RW|0x0|
||29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:22|**IP_22**: Priority of interrupt 22|RW|0x0|
||21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:14|**IP_21**: Priority of interrupt 21|RW|0x0|
||13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:6|**IP_20**: Priority of interrupt 20|RW|0x0|
||5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR6 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe418

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

_Table 102. NVIC_IPR6 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**IP_27**: Priority of interrupt 27|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**IP_26**: Priority of interrupt 26|RW|0x0|
|21:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:14|**IP_25**: Priority of interrupt 25|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:6|**IP_24**: Priority of interrupt 24|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: NVIC_IPR7 Register**

**Offset** : 0xe41c

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Priority Registers to assign a priority from 0 to 3 to each of the available interrupts. 0 is the highest priority, and 3 is the lowest.

|_Table 103. NVIC_IPR7_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:30|**IP_31**: Priority of interrupt 31|RW|0x0|
||29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:22|**IP_30**: Priority of interrupt 30|RW|0x0|
||21:16|Reserved.|-|-|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**83**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|15:14|**IP_29**: Priority of interrupt 29|RW|0x0|
|13:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:6|**IP_28**: Priority of interrupt 28|RW|0x0|
|5:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: CPUID Register**

## **Offset** : 0xed00

## **Description**

Read the CPU ID Base Register to determine: the ID number of the processor core, the version number of the processor core, the implementation details of the processor core.

_Table 104. CPUID Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:24|**IMPLEMENTER**: Implementor code: 0x41 = ARM|RO|0x41|
|23:20|**VARIANT**: Major revision number n in the rnpm revision status:<br>0x0 = Revision 0.|RO|0x0|
|19:16|**ARCHITECTURE**: Constant that defines the architecture of the processor:<br>0xC = ARMv6-M architecture.|RO|0xc|
|15:4|**PARTNO**: Number of processor within family: 0xC60 = Cortex-M0+|RO|0xc60|
|3:0|**REVISION**: Minor revision number m in the rnpm revision status:<br>0x1 = Patch 1.|RO|0x1|



## **M0PLUS: ICSR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed04

## **Description**

Use the Interrupt Control State Register to set a pending Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI), set or clear a pending PendSV, set or clear a pending SysTick, check for pending exceptions, check the vector number of the highest priority pended exception, check the vector number of the active exception.

_Table 105. ICSR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31|**NMIPENDSET**: Setting this bit will activate an NMI. Since NMI is the highest<br>priority exception, it will activate as soon as it is registered.<br>NMI set-pending bit.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Changes NMI exception state to pending.<br>Read:<br>0 = NMI exception is not pending.<br>1 = NMI exception is pending.<br>Because NMI is the highest-priority exception, normally the processor enters<br>the NMI<br>exception handler as soon as it detects a write of 1 to this bit. Entering the<br>handler then clears<br>this bit to 0. This means a read of this bit by the NMI exception handler returns<br>1 only if the<br>NMI signal is reasserted while the processor is executing that handler.|RW|0x0|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**84**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|30:29|Reserved.|-|-|
|28|**PENDSVSET**: PendSV set-pending bit.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Changes PendSV exception state to pending.<br>Read:<br>0 = PendSV exception is not pending.<br>1 = PendSV exception is pending.<br>Writing 1 to this bit is the only way to set the PendSV exception state to<br>pending.|RW|0x0|
|27|**PENDSVCLR**: PendSV clear-pending bit.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Removes the pending state from the PendSV exception.|RW|0x0|
|26|**PENDSTSET**: SysTick exception set-pending bit.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Changes SysTick exception state to pending.<br>Read:<br>0 = SysTick exception is not pending.<br>1 = SysTick exception is pending.|RW|0x0|
|25|**PENDSTCLR**: SysTick exception clear-pending bit.<br>Write:<br>0 = No effect.<br>1 = Removes the pending state from the SysTick exception.<br>This bit is WO. On a register read its value is Unknown.|RW|0x0|
|24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23|**ISRPREEMPT**: The system can only access this bit when the core is halted. It<br>indicates that a pending interrupt is to be taken in the next running cycle. If<br>C_MASKINTS is clear in the Debug Halting Control and Status Register, the<br>interrupt is serviced.|RO|0x0|
|22|**ISRPENDING**: External interrupt pending flag|RO|0x0|
|21|Reserved.|-|-|
|20:12|**VECTPENDING**: Indicates the exception number for the highest priority<br>pending exception: 0 = no pending exceptions. Non zero = The pending state<br>includes the effect of memory-mapped enable and mask registers. It does not<br>include the PRIMASK special-purpose register qualifier.|RO|0x000|
|11:9|Reserved.|-|-|
|8:0|**VECTACTIVE**: Active exception number field. Reset clears the VECTACTIVE<br>field.|RO|0x000|



## **M0PLUS: VTOR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed08

## **Description**

The VTOR holds the vector table offset address.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**85**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 106. VTOR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|**TBLOFF**: Bits [31:8] of the indicate the vector table offset address.|RW|0x000000|
|7:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: AIRCR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed0c

## **Description**

Use the Application Interrupt and Reset Control Register to: determine data endianness, clear all active state information from debug halt mode, request a system reset.

_Table 107. AIRCR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|**VECTKEY**: Register key:<br>Reads as Unknown<br>On writes, write 0x05FA to VECTKEY, otherwise the write is ignored.|RW|0x0000|
|15|**ENDIANESS**: Data endianness implemented:<br>0 = Little-endian.|RO|0x0|
|14:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**SYSRESETREQ**: Writing 1 to this bit causes the SYSRESETREQ signal to the<br>outer system to be asserted to request a reset. The intention is to force a large<br>system reset of all major components except for debug. The C_HALT bit in the<br>DHCSR is cleared as a result of the system reset requested. The debugger<br>does not lose contact with the device.|RW|0x0|
|1|**VECTCLRACTIVE**: Clears all active state information for fixed and<br>configurable exceptions. This bit: is self-clearing, can only be set by the DAP<br>when the core is halted. When set: clears all active exception status of the<br>processor, forces a return to Thread mode, forces an IPSR of 0. A debugger<br>must re-initialize the stack.|RW|0x0|
|0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: SCR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed10

## **Description**

System Control Register. Use the System Control Register for power-management functions: signal to the system when the processor can enter a low power state, control how the processor enters and exits low power states.

_Table 108. SCR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:5|Reserved.|-|-|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**86**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|4|**SEVONPEND**: Send Event on Pending bit:<br>0 = Only enabled interrupts or events can wakeup the processor, disabled<br>interrupts are excluded.<br>1 = Enabled events and all interrupts, including disabled interrupts, can<br>wakeup the processor.<br>When an event or interrupt becomes pending, the event signal wakes up the<br>processor from WFE. If the<br>processor is not waiting for an event, the event is registered and affects the<br>next WFE.<br>The processor also wakes up on execution of an SEV instruction or an external<br>event.|RW|0x0|
|3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**SLEEPDEEP**: Controls whether the processor uses sleep or deep sleep as its<br>low power mode:<br>0 = Sleep.<br>1 = Deep sleep.|RW|0x0|
|1|**SLEEPONEXIT**: Indicates sleep-on-exit when returning from Handler mode to<br>Thread mode:<br>0 = Do not sleep when returning to Thread mode.<br>1 = Enter sleep, or deep sleep, on return from an ISR to Thread mode.<br>Setting this bit to 1 enables an interrupt driven application to avoid returning to<br>an empty main application.|RW|0x0|
|0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: CCR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed14

## **Description**

The Configuration and Control Register permanently enables stack alignment and causes unaligned accesses to result in a Hard Fault.

_Table 109. CCR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:10|Reserved.|-|-|
|9|**STKALIGN**: Always reads as one, indicates 8-byte stack alignment on<br>exception entry. On exception entry, the processor uses bit[9] of the stacked<br>PSR to indicate the stack alignment. On return from the exception it uses this<br>stacked bit to restore the correct stack alignment.|RO|0x0|
|8:4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3|**UNALIGN_TRP**: Always reads as one, indicates that all unaligned accesses<br>generate a HardFault.|RO|0x0|
|2:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: SHPR2 Register**

**Offset** : 0xed1c

## **Description**

System handlers are a special class of exception handler that can have their priority set to any of the priority levels.

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**87**

RP2040 Datasheet

Use the System Handler Priority Register 2 to set the priority of SVCall.

_Table 110. SHPR2 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**PRI_11**: Priority of system handler 11, SVCall|RW|0x0|
|29:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: SHPR3 Register**

**Offset** : 0xed20

## **Description**

System handlers are a special class of exception handler that can have their priority set to any of the priority levels. Use the System Handler Priority Register 3 to set the priority of PendSV and SysTick.

_Table 111. SHPR3 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:30|**PRI_15**: Priority of system handler 15, SysTick|RW|0x0|
|29:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:22|**PRI_14**: Priority of system handler 14, PendSV|RW|0x0|
|21:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: SHCSR Register**

## **Offset** : 0xed24

## **Description**

Use the System Handler Control and State Register to determine or clear the pending status of SVCall.

|_Table 112. SHCSR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15|**SVCALLPENDED**: Reads as 1 if SVCall is Pending. Write 1 to set pending<br>SVCall, write 0 to clear pending SVCall.|RW|0x0|
||14:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **M0PLUS: MPU_TYPE Register**

**Offset** : 0xed90

## **Description**

Read the MPU Type Register to determine if the processor implements an MPU, and how many regions the MPU supports.

|_Table 113. MPU_TYPE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:16|**IREGION**: Instruction region. Reads as zero as ARMv6-M only supports a<br>unified MPU.|RO|0x00|
||15:8|**DREGION**: Number of regions supported by the MPU.|RO|0x08|
||7:1|Reserved.|-|-|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**88**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|**SEPARATE**: Indicates support for separate instruction and data address<br>maps. Reads as 0 as ARMv6-M only supports a unified MPU.|RO|0x0|



## **M0PLUS: MPU_CTRL Register**

**Offset** : 0xed94

## **Description**

Use the MPU Control Register to enable and disable the MPU, and to control whether the default memory map is enabled as a background region for privileged accesses, and whether the MPU is enabled for HardFaults and NMIs.

_Table 114. MPU_CTRL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**PRIVDEFENA**: Controls whether the default memory map is enabled as a<br>background region for privileged accesses. This bit is ignored when ENABLE is<br>clear.<br>0 = If the MPU is enabled, disables use of the default memory map. Any<br>memory access to a location not<br>covered by any enabled region causes a fault.<br>1 = If the MPU is enabled, enables use of the default memory map as a<br>background region for privileged software accesses.<br>When enabled, the background region acts as if it is region number -1. Any<br>region that is defined and enabled has priority over this default map.|RW|0x0|
|1|**HFNMIENA**: Controls the use of the MPU for HardFaults and NMIs. Setting this<br>bit when ENABLE is clear results in UNPREDICTABLE behaviour.<br>When the MPU is enabled:<br>0 = MPU is disabled during HardFault and NMI handlers, regardless of the<br>value of the ENABLE bit.<br>1 = the MPU is enabled during HardFault and NMI handlers.|RW|0x0|
|0|**ENABLE**: Enables the MPU. If the MPU is disabled, privileged and unprivileged<br>accesses use the default memory map.<br>0 = MPU disabled.<br>1 = MPU enabled.|RW|0x0|



## **M0PLUS: MPU_RNR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed98

## **Description**

Use the MPU Region Number Register to select the region currently accessed by MPU_RBAR and MPU_RASR.

|_Table 115. MPU_RNR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
||3:0|**REGION**: Indicates the MPU region referenced by the MPU_RBAR and<br>MPU_RASR registers.<br>The MPU supports 8 memory regions, so the permitted values of this field are<br>0-7.|RW|0x0|



## **M0PLUS: MPU_RBAR Register**

**Offset** : 0xed9c

2.4. Cortex-M0+

**89**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Read the MPU Region Base Address Register to determine the base address of the region identified by MPU_RNR. Write to update the base address of said region or that of a specified region, with whose number MPU_RNR will also be updated.

|_Table 116. MPU_RBAR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|**ADDR**: Base address of the region.|RW|0x000000|
||7:5|Reserved.|-|-|
||4|**VALID**: On writes, indicates whether the write must update the base address of<br>the region identified by the REGION field, updating the MPU_RNR to indicate<br>this new region.<br>Write:<br>0 = MPU_RNR not changed, and the processor:<br>Updates the base address for the region specified in the MPU_RNR.<br>Ignores the value of the REGION field.<br>1 = The processor:<br>Updates the value of the MPU_RNR to the value of the REGION field.<br>Updates the base address for the region specified in the REGION field.<br>Always reads as zero.|RW|0x0|
||3:0|**REGION**: On writes, specifies the number of the region whose base address to<br>update provided VALID is set written as 1. On reads, returns bits [3:0] of<br>MPU_RNR.|RW|0x0|



## **M0PLUS: MPU_RASR Register**

**Offset** : 0xeda0

## **Description**

Use the MPU Region Attribute and Size Register to define the size, access behaviour and memory type of the region identified by MPU_RNR, and enable that region.

|_Table 117. MPU_RASR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|**ATTRS**: The MPU Region Attribute field. Use to define the region attribute<br>control.<br>28 = XN: Instruction access disable bit:<br>0 = Instruction fetches enabled.<br>1 = Instruction fetches disabled.<br>26:24 = AP: Access permission field<br>18 = S: Shareable bit<br>17 = C: Cacheable bit<br>16 = B: Bufferable bit|RW|0x0000|
||15:8|**SRD**: Subregion Disable. For regions of 256 bytes or larger, each bit of this<br>field controls whether one of the eight equal subregions is enabled.|RW|0x00|
||7:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:1|**SIZE**: Indicates the region size. Region size in bytes = 2^(SIZE+1). The<br>minimum permitted value is 7 (b00111) = 256Bytes|RW|0x00|
||0|**ENABLE**: Enables the region.|RW|0x0|



2.4. Cortex-M0+

**90**

RP2040 Datasheet
