## **2.5. DMA**

The RP2040 Direct Memory Access (DMA) controller has separate read and write master connections to the bus fabric, and performs bulk data transfers on a processor’s behalf. This leaves processors free to attend to other tasks, or enter low-power sleep states. The data throughput of the DMA is also significantly higher than one of RP2040’s processors.

_Figure 12. DMA Architecture Overview. The read master can read data from some address every clock cycle. Likewise, the write master can write to another address. The address generator produces matched pairs of read and write addresses, which the masters consume_ The DMA can perform one read access and one write access, up to 32 bits in size, every clock cycle. There are 12 _through the address_ independent channels, each which supervise a sequence of bus transfers, usually in one of the following scenarios: _FIFOs. Up to 12 transfer sequences_ • _[[Memory-to-peripheral]]_[[: a peripheral signals the DMA when it needs more data to transmit. The DMA reads data from]] _may be in progress simultaneously,_ an array in RAM or flash, and writes to the peripheral’s data FIFO. _supervised by software via the_ • _[Peripheral-to-memory]_[: a peripheral signals the DMA when it has received data. The DMA reads this data from the] _control and status_ peripheral’s data FIFO, and writes it to an array in RAM. _registers._

The DMA can perform one read access and one write access, up to 32 bits in size, every clock cycle. There are 12 independent channels, each which supervise a sequence of bus transfers, usually in one of the following scenarios:

- _[[Memory-to-peripheral]]_[[: a peripheral signals the DMA when it needs more data to transmit. The DMA reads data from]] an array in RAM or flash, and writes to the peripheral’s data FIFO.

- _[Memory-to-memory]_[: the DMA transfers data between two buffers in RAM, as fast as possible.]

Each channel has its own control and status registers (CSRs), with which software can program and monitor the channel’s progress. When multiple channels are active at the same time, the DMA shares bandwidth evenly between the channels, with round-robin over all channels which are currently requesting data transfers.

The transfer size can be either 32, 16, or 8 bits. This is configured once per channel: source transfer size and destination transfer size are the same. The DMA performs standard byte lane replication on narrow writes, so byte data is available in all 4 bytes of the databus, and halfword data in both halfwords.

Channels can be combined in varied ways for more sophisticated behaviour and greater autonomy. For example, one channel can configure another, loading configuration data from a sequence of control blocks in memory, and the second can then call back to the first via the CHAIN_TO option, when it needs to be reconfigured.

Making the DMA more autonomous means that much less processor supervision is required: overall this allows the system to do more at once, or to dissipate less power.

## **2.5.1. Configuring Channels**

Each channel has four control/status registers:

- [READ_ADDR][ is a pointer to the next address to be read from]

- [WRITE_ADDR][ is a pointer to the next address to be written to]

- [TRANS_COUNT][ shows the number of transfers remaining in the current transfer sequence, and is used to program the] number of transfers in the next transfer sequence (see Section 2.5.1.2).

- [CTRL][ is used to configure all other aspects of the channel’s behaviour, to enable/disable it, and to check for] completion.

These are live registers: they update continuously as the channel progresses.

2.5. DMA

**91**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.5.1.1. Read and Write Addresses**

READ_ADDR and WRITE_ADDR contain the address the channel will next read from, and write to, respectively. These registers update automatically after each read/write access. They increment by 1, 2 or 4 bytes at a time, depending on the transfer size configured in CTRL.

Software should generally program these registers with new start addresses each time a new transfer sequence starts. If READ_ADDR and WRITE_ADDR are not reprogrammed, the DMA will use the current values as start addresses for the next transfer. For example:

- [If the address does not increment (e.g. it is the address of a peripheral FIFO), and the next transfer sequence is] to/from that _same_ address, there is no need to write to the register again.

- [When transferring to/from a consecutive series of buffers in memory (e.g. scattering and gathering), an address] register will already have incremented to the start of the next buffer at the completion of a transfer.

By not programming all four CSRs for each transfer sequence, software can use shorter interrupt handlers, and more compact control block formats when used with channel chaining (see register aliases in Section 2.5.2.1, chaining in Section 2.5.2.2).

##  **CAUTION**

READ_ADDR and WRITE_ADDR must always be aligned to the current transfer size, as specified in CTRL.DATA_SIZE. It is up to software to ensure the initial values are correctly aligned.

## **2.5.1.2. Transfer Count**

Reading from TRANS_COUNT yields the number of transfers remaining in the current transfer sequence. This value updates continuously as the channel progresses. Writing to TRANS_COUNT sets the length of the _next_ transfer sequence. Up to _2[32] -1_ transfers can be performed in one sequence.

Each time the channel starts a new transfer sequence, the most recent value written to TRANS_COUNT is copied to the live transfer counter, which will then start to decrement again as the new transfer sequence makes progress. For debugging purposes, the last value written can be read from the DBG_TCR (TRANS_COUNT reload value) register.

If the channel is triggered multiple times without intervening writes to TRANS_COUNT, it performs the same number of transfers each time. For example, when chained to, one channel might load a fixed-size control block into another channel’s CSRs. TRANS_COUNT would be programmed once by software, and then reload automatically every time.

Alternatively, TRANS_COUNT can be written with a new value before starting each transfer sequence. If TRANS_COUNT is the channel trigger (see Section 2.5.2.1), the channel will start immediately, and the value just written will be used, _not_ the value currently in the reload register.

##  **NOTE**

The TRANS_COUNT is the number of _transfers_ to be performed. The total number of bytes transferred is TRANS_COUNT times the size of each transfer in bytes, given by CTRL.DATA_SIZE.

## **2.5.1.3. Control/Status**

The CTRL register has more, smaller fields than the other 3 registers, and full details of these are given in the CTRL register listings. Among other things, CTRL is used to:

- [Configure the size of this channel’s data transfers, via ][CTRL.DATA_SIZE][. Reads and writes are the same size.]

- [Configure if and how ][READ_ADDR][ and ][WRITE_ADDR][ increment after each read or write, via ][CTRL.INCR_WRITE][, ][CTRL.INCR_READ][,] CTRL.RING_SEL, CTRL.RING_SIZE. Ring transfers are available, where one of the address pointers wraps at some powerof-2 boundary.

2.5. DMA

**92**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Select another channel (or none) to be triggered when this channel completes, via ][CTRL.CHAIN_TO][.]

- [Select a peripheral data request (DREQ) signal to pace this channel’s transfers, via ][CTRL.TREQ_SEL][.]

- [See when the channel is idle, via ][CTRL.BUSY][.]

- [See if the channel has encountered a bus error, e.g. due to a faulty address being accessed, via ][CTRL.AHB_ERROR][,] CTRL.READ_ERROR, or CTRL.WRITE_ERROR.

## **2.5.2. Starting Channels**

There are three ways to start a channel:

- [Writing to a channel trigger register]

- [A chain trigger from another channel which has just completed, and has its ][CHAIN_TO][ field configured]

- [The ][MULTI_CHAN_TRIGGER][ register, which can start multiple channels at once]

Each of these covers different use cases. For example, trigger registers are simple and efficient when configuring and starting a channel in an interrupt service routine, and CHAIN_TO allows one channel to callback to another channel, which can then reconfigure the first channel.

##  **NOTE**

Triggering a channel which is already running has no effect.

## **2.5.2.1. Aliases and Triggers**

_Table 118. Control register aliases. Each channel has four control/status registers. Each register can be accessed at multiple different addresses. In each naturally-aligned group of four, all four registers appear, in different orders._

|**Offset**|**+0x0**|**+0x4**|**+0x8**|**+0xC**(Trigger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|0x00 (Alias 0)|READ_ADDR|WRITE_ADDR|TRANS_COUNT|CTRL_TRIG|
|0x10 (Alias 1)|CTRL|READ_ADDR|WRITE_ADDR|TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|
|0x20 (Alias 2)|CTRL|TRANS_COUNT|READ_ADDR|WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|
|0x30 (Alias 3)|CTRL|WRITE_ADDR|TRANS_COUNT|READ_ADD_TRIG|



The four CSRs are aliased multiple times in memory. Each alias — of which there are four — exposes the same four physical registers, but in a different order. The final register in each alias (at offset +0xC, highlighted) is a trigger register. Writing to the trigger register starts the channel.

Often, only alias 0 is used, and aliases 1-3 can be ignored. The channel is configured _and_ started by writing READ_ADDR, WRITE_ADDR, TRANS_COUNT and finally CTRL. Since CTRL is the trigger register in alias 0, this starts the channel.

The other aliases allow more compact control block lists when using one channel to configure another, and more efficient reconfiguration and launch in interrupt handlers:

- [Each CSR is a trigger register in one of the aliases:]

   - [When gathering fixed-size buffers into a peripheral, the DMA channel can be configured and launched by] writing only READ_ADDR_TRIG.

   - [When scattering from a peripheral to fixed-size buffers, the channel can be configured and launched by] writing only WRITE_ADDR_TRIG.

- [Useful combinations of registers appear as naturally-aligned tuples which contain a trigger register. In conjunction] with channel chaining and address wrapping, these implement compressed control block formats, e.g.:

   - [(][WRITE_ADDR][, ][TRANS_COUNT_TRIG][) for peripheral scatter operations]

2.5. DMA

**93**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [(][TRANS_COUNT][, READ_ADDR_TRIG) for peripheral gather operations, or calculating CRCs on a list of buffers]

- [(][READ_ADDR][, ][WRITE_ADDR_TRIG][) for manipulating fixed-size buffers in memory]

Trigger registers do not start the channel if:

- [The channel is disabled via ][CTRL.EN][. (If the trigger is ][CTRL][, the just-written value of ][EN][ is used, ] _[not]_[ the value currently] in the CTRL register.)

- [The channel is already running]

- [The value 0 is written to the trigger register. (This is useful for ending control block chains. See null triggers,] Section 2.5.2.3)

## **2.5.2.2. Chaining**

When a channel completes, it can name a different channel to immediately be triggered. This can be used as a callback for the second channel to reconfigure and restart the first.

This feature is configured through the CHAIN_TO field in the channel CTRL register. This 4-bit value selects a channel that will start when this one finishes. A channel can not chain to itself. Setting CHAIN_TO to a channel’s own index means no chaining will take place.

Chain triggers behave the same as triggers from other sources, such as trigger registers. For example, they cause TRANS_COUNT to reload, and they are ignored if the targeted channel is already running.

One application for CHAIN_TO is for a channel to request reconfiguration by another channel, from a sequence of control blocks in memory. Channel A is configured to perform a wrapped transfer from memory to channel B’s control registers (including a trigger register), and channel B is configured to chain back to channel A when it completes each transfer sequence. This is shown more explicitly in the DMA control blocks example (Section 2.5.6.2).

Use of the register aliases (Section 2.5.2.1) enables compact formats for DMA control blocks: as little as one word in some cases.

Another use of chaining is a "ping-pong" configuration, where two channels each trigger one another. The processor can respond to the channel completion interrupts, and reconfigure each channel after it completes; however, the chained channel, which has already been configured, starts immediately. In other words, channel configuration and channel operation are pipelined. Performance can improve dramatically where many short transfer sequences are required.

The Section 2.5.6 goes into more detail on the possibilities of chain triggers, in the real world.

## **2.5.2.3. Null Triggers and Chain Interrupts**

As mentioned in Section 2.5.2.1, writing all-zeroes to a trigger register does _not_ start the channel. This is called a null trigger, and it has two purposes:

- [Cause a halt at the end of an array of control blocks, by appending an all-zeroes block]

- [Reduce the number of interrupts generated when control blocks are used]

By default, a channel will generate an interrupt each time it finishes a transfer sequence, unless that channel’s IRQ is masked in INTE0 or INTE1. The rate of interrupts can be excessive, particularly as processor attention is generally not required while a sequence of control blocks are in progress; however, processor attention _is_ required at the end of a chain.

The channel CTRL register has a field called IRQ_QUIET. Its default value is 0. When this set to 1, channels generate an interrupt when they receive a null trigger, and at no other time. The interrupt is generated by the channel which receives the trigger.

2.5. DMA

**94**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.5.3. Data Request (DREQ)**

Peripherals produce or consume data at their own pace. If the DMA simply transferred data as fast as possible, loss or corruption of data would ensue. DREQs are a communication channel between peripherals and the DMA, which enables the DMA to pace transfers according to the needs of the peripheral.

The CTRL.TREQ_SEL (transfer request) field selects an external DREQ. It can also be used to select one of the internal pacing timers, or select no TREQ at all (the transfer proceeds as fast as possible), e.g. for memory-to-memory transfers.

## **2.5.3.1. System DREQ Table**

There is a global assignment of DREQ numbers to peripheral DREQ channels.

_Table 119. DREQs_

|**DREQ**|**DREQ Channel**|**DREQ**|**DREQ Channel**|**DREQ**|**DREQ Channel**|**DREQ**|**DREQ Channel**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0|DREQ_PIO0_TX0|10|DREQ_PIO1_TX2|20|DREQ_UART0_TX|30|DREQ_PWM_WRAP6|
|1|DREQ_PIO0_TX1|11|DREQ_PIO1_TX3|21|DREQ_UART0_RX|31|DREQ_PWM_WRAP7|
|2|DREQ_PIO0_TX2|12|DREQ_PIO1_RX0|22|DREQ_UART1_TX|32|DREQ_I2C0_TX|
|3|DREQ_PIO0_TX3|13|DREQ_PIO1_RX1|23|DREQ_UART1_RX|33|DREQ_I2C0_RX|
|4|DREQ_PIO0_RX0|14|DREQ_PIO1_RX2|24|DREQ_PWM_WRAP0|34|DREQ_I2C1_TX|
|5|DREQ_PIO0_RX1|15|DREQ_PIO1_RX3|25|DREQ_PWM_WRAP1|35|DREQ_I2C1_RX|
|6|DREQ_PIO0_RX2|16|DREQ_SPI0_TX|26|DREQ_PWM_WRAP2|36|DREQ_ADC|
|7|DREQ_PIO0_RX3|17|DREQ_SPI0_RX|27|DREQ_PWM_WRAP3|37|DREQ_XIP_STREAM|
|8|DREQ_PIO1_TX0|18|DREQ_SPI1_TX|28|DREQ_PWM_WRAP4|38|DREQ_XIP_SSITX|
|9|DREQ_PIO1_TX1|19|DREQ_SPI1_RX|29|DREQ_PWM_WRAP5|39|DREQ_XIP_SSIRX|



## **2.5.3.2. Credit-based DREQ Scheme**

The RP2040 DMA is designed for systems where:

- [The area and power cost of large peripheral data FIFOs is prohibitive]

- [The bandwidth demands of individual peripherals may be high, e.g. >50% bus injection rate for short periods]

- [Bus latency is low, but multiple masters may be competing for bus access]

In addition, the DMA’s transfer FIFOs and dual-master structure permit multiple accesses to the same peripheral to be in flight at once, to improve gross throughput. Choice of DREQ mechanism is therefore critical:

- [The traditional "turn on the tap" method can cause overflow if multiple writes are backed up in the TDF. Some] systems solve this by overprovisioning peripheral FIFOs and setting the DREQ threshold below the full level, but this wastes precious area and power

- [The ARM-style single and burst handshake does not permit additional requests to be registered while the current] request is being served. This limits performance when FIFOs are very shallow.

The RP2040 DMA uses a credit-based DREQ mechanism. For each peripheral, the DMA attempts to keep as many transfers in flight as the peripheral has capacity for. This enables full bus throughput (1 word per clock) through an 8- deep peripheral FIFO with no possibility of overflow or underflow, in the absence of fabric latency or contention.

For each channel, the DMA maintains a counter. Each 1-clock pulse on the dreq signal will increment this counter (saturating). When nonzero, the channel requests a transfer from the DMA’s internal arbiter, and the counter is decremented when the transfer is issued to the address FIFOs. At this point the transfer is in flight, but has not yet necessarily completed.

2.5. DMA

**95**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 13. DREQ counting_

**==> picture [297 x 60] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
clk<br>dreq<br>chan count 0 1 0 1 1 2<br>chan issue<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The effect is to upper bound the number of in-flight transfers based on the amount of room or data available in the peripheral FIFO. In the steady state, this gives maximum throughput, but can’t underflow or underflow.

One caveat is that the user _must not_ access a FIFO which is currently being serviced by the DMA. This causes the channel and peripheral to become desynchronised, and can cause corruption or loss of data.

Another caveat is that multiple channels should not be connected to the same DREQ.

## **2.5.4. Interrupts**

Each channel can generate interrupts; these can be masked on a per-channel basis using the INTE0 or INTE1 registers. There are two circumstances where a channel raises an interrupt request:

- [On the completion of each transfer sequence, if ][CTRL.IRQ_QUIET][ is disabled]

- [On receiving a null trigger, if ][CTRL.IRQ_QUIET][ is enabled]

The masked interrupt status is visible in the INTS registers; there is one bit for each channel. Interrupts are cleared by writing a bit mask to INTS. One idiom for acknowledging interrupts is to read INTS and then write the same value back, so only enabled interrupts are cleared.

The RP2040 DMA provides two system IRQs, with independent masking and status registers (e.g. INTE0, INTE1). Any combination of channel interrupt requests can be routed to either system IRQ. For example:

- [Some channels can be given a higher priority in the system interrupt controller, if they have particularly tight timing] requirements

- [In multiprocessor systems, different channel interrupts can be routed independently to different cores]

For debugging purposes, the INTF registers can force either IRQ to be asserted.

## **2.5.5. Additional Features**

## **2.5.5.1. Pacing Timers**

These allow transfer of data roughly once every _n_ clk_sys clocks instead of using external peripheral DREQ to trigger transfers. A fractional (X/Y) divider is used, and will generate a maximum of 1 request per clk_sys cycle.

There are 4 timers available in RP2040. Each DMA is able to select any of these in CTRL.TREQ_SEL.

## **2.5.5.2. CRC Calculation**

The DMA can watch data from a given channel passing through the data FIFO, and calculate checksums based on this data. This a purely passive affair: the data is not altered by this hardware, only observed.

The feature is controlled via the SNIFF_CTRL and SNIFF_DATA registers, and can be enabled/disabled per DMA transfer via the CTRL.SNIFF_EN field.

As this hardware cannot place backpressure on the FIFO, it must keep up with the DMA’s maximum transfer rate of 32 bits per clock.

The supported checksums are:

2.5. DMA

**96**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [CRC-32, MSB-first and LSB-first]

- [CRC-16-CCITT, MSB-first and LSB-first]

- [Simple summation (add to 32-bit accumulator)]

- [Even parity]

The result register is both readable and writable, so that the initial seed value can be set.

Bit/byte manipulations are available on the result which may aid specific use cases:

- [Bit inversion]

- [Bit reversal]

- [Byte swap]

These manipulations do not affect the CRC calculation, just how the data is presented in the result register.

## **2.5.5.3. Channel Abort**

It is possible for a channel to get into an irrecoverable state: e.g. if commanded to transfer more data than a peripheral will ever request, it will never complete. Clearing the CTRL.EN bit merely pauses the channel, and does not solve the problem. This should not occur under normal circumstances, but it is important that there is a mechanism to recover without simply hard-resetting the entire DMA block.

The CHAN_ABORT register forces channels to complete early. There is one bit for each channel, and writing a 1 terminates that channel. This clears the transfer counter and forces the channel into an inactive state.

##  **CAUTION**

Due to RP2040-E13, aborting a DMA channel that is making progress (i.e. not stalled on an inactive DREQ) may cause a completion IRQ to assert. The channel interrupt enable should be cleared before performing the abort, and the interrupt should be checked and cleared after the abort.

At the time an abort is triggered, a channel may have bus transfers currently in flight between the read and write master, and these transfers cannot be revoked. The CTRL.BUSY flag stays high until these transfers complete, and the channel reaches a safe state, which generally takes only a few cycles. The channel must not be restarted until its CTRL.BUSY flag deasserts. Starting a new sequence of transfers whilst transfers from an old sequence are still in flight can lead to unpredictable behaviour.

## **2.5.5.4. Debug**

Debug registers are available for each DMA channel to show the dreq counter DBG_CTDREQ and next transfer count DBG_TCR. These can also be used to reset a DMA channel if required.

## **2.5.6. Example Use Cases**

## **2.5.6.1. Using Interrupts to Reconfigure a Channel**

When a channel finishes a block of transfers, it becomes available for making more transfers. Software detects that the channel is no longer busy, and reconfigures and restarts the channel. One approach is to poll the CTRL_BUSY bit until the channel is done, but this loses one of the key advantages of the DMA, namely that it does _not_ have to operate in lockstep with a processor. By setting the correct bit in INTE0 or INTE1, we can instruct the DMA to raise one of its two interrupt request lines when a given channel completes. Rather than repeatedly asking if a channel is done, we are told.

2.5. DMA

**97**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

Having two system interrupt lines allows different channel completion interrupts to be routed to different cores, or to preempt one another on the same core if one channel is more time-critical.

When the interrupt is asserted, the processor can be configured to drop whatever it is doing and call a user-specified handler function. The handler can reconfigure and restart the channel. When the handler exits, the processor returns to the interrupted code running in the foreground.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/dma/channel_irq/channel_irq.c Lines 35 - 52_

35 void dma_handler() { 36     static int pwm_level = 0; 37     static uint32_t wavetable[N_PWM_LEVELS]; 38     static bool first_run = true; 39 _// Entry number `i` has `i` one bits and `(32 - i)` zero bits._ 40     if (first_run) { 41         first_run = false; 42         for (int i = 0; i < N_PWM_LEVELS; ++i) 43             wavetable[i] = ~(~0u << i); 44     } 45 46 _// Clear the interrupt request._ 47     dma_hw->ints0 = 1u << dma_chan; 48 _// Give the channel a new wave table entry to read from, and re-trigger it_ 49     dma_channel_set_read_addr(dma_chan, &wavetable[pwm_level], true); 50 51     pwm_level = (pwm_level + 1) % N_PWM_LEVELS; 52 }

In many cases, most of the configuration can be done the first time the channel is started, and only addresses and transfer lengths need reprogramming in the DMA handler.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/dma/channel_irq/channel_irq.c Lines 54 - 94_

54 int main() { 55 _#ifndef PICO_DEFAULT_LED_PIN_ 56 _#warning dma/channel_irq example requires a board with a regular LED_ 57 _#else_ 58 _// Set up a PIO state machine to serialise our bits_ 59     uint offset = pio_add_program(pio0, &pio_serialiser_program); 60     pio_serialiser_program_init(pio0, 0, offset, PICO_DEFAULT_LED_PIN, PIO_SERIAL_CLKDIV); 61 62 _// Configure a channel to write the same word (32 bits) repeatedly to PIO0_ 63 _// SM0's TX FIFO, paced by the data request signal from that peripheral._ 64     dma_chan = dma_claim_unused_channel(true); 65     dma_channel_config c = dma_channel_get_default_config(dma_chan); 66     channel_config_set_transfer_data_size(&c, DMA_SIZE_32); 67     channel_config_set_read_increment(&c, false); 68     channel_config_set_dreq(&c, DREQ_PIO0_TX0); 69 70     dma_channel_configure( 71         dma_chan, 72         &c, 73         &pio0_hw->txf[0], _// Write address (only need to set this once)_ 74         NULL, _// Don't provide a read address yet_ 75         PWM_REPEAT_COUNT, _// Write the same value many times, then halt and interrupt_ 76         false _// Don't start yet_ 77     ); 78

2.5. DMA

**98**

RP2040 Datasheet

79 _// Tell the DMA to raise IRQ line 0 when the channel finishes a block_ 80     dma_channel_set_irq0_enabled(dma_chan, true); 81 82 _// Configure the processor to run dma_handler() when DMA IRQ 0 is asserted_ 83     irq_set_exclusive_handler(DMA_IRQ_0, dma_handler); 84     irq_set_enabled(DMA_IRQ_0, true); 85 86 _// Manually call the handler once, to trigger the first transfer_ 87     dma_handler(); 88 89 _// Everything else from this point is interrupt-driven. The processor has_ 90 _// time to sit and think about its early retirement -- maybe open a bakery?_ 91     while (true) 92         tight_loop_contents(); 93 _#endif_ 94 }

One disadvantage of this technique is that we don’t start to reconfigure the channel until some time after the channel makes its last transfer. If there is heavy interrupt activity on the processor, this may be quite a long time, and therefore quite a large gap in transfers, which is problematic if we need to sustain a high data throughput.

This is solved by using two channels, with their CHAIN_TO fields crossed over, so that channel A triggers channel B when it completes, and vice versa. At any point in time, one of the channels is transferring data, and the other is either already configured to start the next transfer immediately when the current one finishes, or it is in the process of being reconfigured. When channel A completes, it immediately starts the cued-up transfer on channel B. At the same time, the interrupt is fired, and the handler reconfigures channel A so that it is ready for when channel B completes.

## **2.5.6.2. DMA Control Blocks**

Frequently, multiple smaller buffers must be gathered together and sent to the same peripheral. To address this use case, the RP2040 DMA can execute a long and complex _sequence_ of transfers without processor control. One channel repeatedly reconfigures a second channel, and the second channel restarts the first each time it completes block of transfers.

Because the first DMA channel is transferring data directly from memory to the second channel’s control registers, the format of the control blocks in memory must match those registers. The last register written to, each time, will be one of the trigger registers (Section 2.5.2.1) which will start the second channel on its programmed block of transfers. The register aliases (Section 2.5.2.1) give some flexibility for the block layout, and more importantly allow some registers to be omitted from the blocks, so they occupy less memory and can be loaded more quickly.

This example shows how multiple buffers can be gathered and transferred to the UART, by reprogramming TRANS_COUNT and READ_ADDR_TRIG:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/dma/control_blocks/control_blocks.c_

1 _/**_ 2 _* Copyright (c) 2020 Raspberry Pi (Trading) Ltd._ 3 _*_ 4 _* SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause_ 5 _*/_ 6 7 _// Use two DMA channels to make a programmed sequence of data transfers to the_ 8 _// UART (a data gather operation). One channel is responsible for transferring_ 9 _// the actual data, the other repeatedly reprograms that channel._ 10 11 _#include <stdio.h>_ 12 _#include "pico/stdlib.h"_ 13 _#include "hardware/dma.h"_ 14 _#include "hardware/structs/uart.h"_

2.5. DMA

**99**

RP2040 Datasheet

15 16 _// These buffers will be DMA'd to the UART, one after the other._ 17 18 const char word0[] = "Transferring "; 19 const char word1[] = "one "; 20 const char word2[] = "word "; 21 const char word3[] = "at "; 22 const char word4[] = "a "; 23 const char word5[] = "time.\n"; 24 25 _// Note the order of the fields here: it's important that the length is before_ 26 _// the read address, because the control channel is going to write to the last_ 27 _// two registers in alias 3 on the data channel:_ 28 _//           +0x0        +0x4          +0x8          +0xC (Trigger)_ 29 _// Alias 0:  READ_ADDR   WRITE_ADDR    TRANS_COUNT   CTRL_ 30 _// Alias 1:  CTRL        READ_ADDR     WRITE_ADDR    TRANS_COUNT_ 31 _// Alias 2:  CTRL        TRANS_COUNT   READ_ADDR     WRITE_ADDR_ 32 _// Alias 3:  CTRL        WRITE_ADDR    TRANS_COUNT   READ_ADDR_ 33 _//_ 34 _// This will program the transfer count and read address of the data channel,_ 35 _// and trigger it. Once the data channel completes, it will restart the_ 36 _// control channel (via CHAIN_TO) to load the next two words into its control_ 37 _// registers._ 38 39 const struct {uint32_t len; const char *data;} control_blocks[] = { 40     {count_of(word0) - 1, word0}, _// Skip null terminator_ 41     {count_of(word1) - 1, word1}, 42     {count_of(word2) - 1, word2}, 43     {count_of(word3) - 1, word3}, 44     {count_of(word4) - 1, word4}, 45     {count_of(word5) - 1, word5}, 46     {0, NULL} _// Null trigger to end chain._ 47 }; 48 49 int main() { 50 _#ifndef uart_default_ 51 _#warning dma/control_blocks example requires a UART_ 52 _#else_ 53     stdio_init_all(); 54     puts("DMA control block example:"); 55 56 _// ctrl_chan loads control blocks into data_chan, which executes them._ 57     int ctrl_chan = dma_claim_unused_channel(true); 58     int data_chan = dma_claim_unused_channel(true); 59 60 _// The control channel transfers two words into the data channel's control_ 61 _// registers, then halts. The write address wraps on a two-word_

62 _// (eight-byte) boundary, so that the control channel writes the same two_ 63 _// registers when it is next triggered._ 64 65     dma_channel_config c = dma_channel_get_default_config(ctrl_chan); 66     channel_config_set_transfer_data_size(&c, DMA_SIZE_32); 67     channel_config_set_read_increment(&c, true); 68     channel_config_set_write_increment(&c, true); 69     channel_config_set_ring(&c, true, 3); _// 1 << 3 byte boundary on write ptr_ 70 71     dma_channel_configure( 72         ctrl_chan, 73         &c, 74         &dma_hw->ch[data_chan].al3_transfer_count, _// Initial write address_ 75         &control_blocks[0], _// Initial read address_ 76         2, _// Halt after each control block_ 77         false _// Don't start yet_ 78     );

2.5. DMA

**100**

RP2040 Datasheet

- 79 80 _// The data channel is set up to write to the UART FIFO (paced by the_ 81 _// UART's TX data request signal) and then chain to the control channel_ 82 _// once it completes. The control channel programs a new read address and_ 83 _// data length, and retriggers the data channel._ 84 85     c = dma_channel_get_default_config(data_chan); 86     channel_config_set_transfer_data_size(&c, DMA_SIZE_8); 87     channel_config_set_dreq(&c, uart_get_dreq(uart_default, true)); 88 _// Trigger ctrl_chan when data_chan completes_ 89     channel_config_set_chain_to(&c, ctrl_chan); 90 _// Raise the IRQ flag when 0 is written to a trigger register (end of chain):_ 91     channel_config_set_irq_quiet(&c, true); 92 93     dma_channel_configure( 94         data_chan, 95         &c, 96         &uart_get_hw(uart_default)->dr, 97         NULL, _// Initial read address and transfer count are unimportant;_ 98         0, _// the control channel will reprogram them each time._ 99         false _// Don't start yet._ 100     ); 101 102 _// Everything is ready to go. Tell the control channel to load the first_ 103 _// control block. Everything is automatic from here._ 104     dma_start_channel_mask(1u << ctrl_chan); 105 106 _// The data channel will assert its IRQ flag when it gets a null trigger,_ 107 _// indicating the end of the control block list. We're just going to wait_ 108 _// for the IRQ flag instead of setting up an interrupt handler._ 109     while (!(dma_hw->intr & 1u << data_chan)) 110         tight_loop_contents(); 111     dma_hw->ints0 = 1u << data_chan; 112 113     puts("DMA finished."); 114 _#endif_ 115 }

## **2.5.7. List of Registers**

The DMA registers start at a base address of 0x50000000 (defined as DMA_BASE in SDK).

_Table 120. List of DMA registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x000|CH0_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 0 Read Address pointer|
|0x004|CH0_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 0 Write Address pointer|
|0x008|CH0_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 0 Transfer Count|
|0x00c|CH0_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 0 Control and Status|
|0x010|CH0_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 0 CTRL register|
|0x014|CH0_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 0 READ_ADDR register|
|0x018|CH0_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 0 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x01c|CH0_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 0 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x020|CH0_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 0 CTRL register|



2.5. DMA

**101**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x024|CH0_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 0 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x028|CH0_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 0 READ_ADDR register|
|0x02c|CH0_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 0 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x030|CH0_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 0 CTRL register|
|0x034|CH0_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 0 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x038|CH0_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 0 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x03c|CH0_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 0 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x040|CH1_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 1 Read Address pointer|
|0x044|CH1_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 1 Write Address pointer|
|0x048|CH1_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 1 Transfer Count|
|0x04c|CH1_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 1 Control and Status|
|0x050|CH1_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 1 CTRL register|
|0x054|CH1_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 1 READ_ADDR register|
|0x058|CH1_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 1 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x05c|CH1_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 1 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x060|CH1_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 1 CTRL register|
|0x064|CH1_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 1 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x068|CH1_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 1 READ_ADDR register|
|0x06c|CH1_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 1 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x070|CH1_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 1 CTRL register|
|0x074|CH1_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 1 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x078|CH1_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 1 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x07c|CH1_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 1 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x080|CH2_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 2 Read Address pointer|
|0x084|CH2_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 2 Write Address pointer|
|0x088|CH2_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 2 Transfer Count|
|0x08c|CH2_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 2 Control and Status|
|0x090|CH2_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 2 CTRL register|
|0x094|CH2_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 2 READ_ADDR register|



2.5. DMA

**102**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x098|CH2_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 2 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x09c|CH2_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 2 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x0a0|CH2_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 2 CTRL register|
|0x0a4|CH2_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 2 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x0a8|CH2_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 2 READ_ADDR register|
|0x0ac|CH2_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 2 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x0b0|CH2_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 2 CTRL register|
|0x0b4|CH2_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 2 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x0b8|CH2_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 2 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x0bc|CH2_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 2 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x0c0|CH3_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 3 Read Address pointer|
|0x0c4|CH3_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 3 Write Address pointer|
|0x0c8|CH3_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 3 Transfer Count|
|0x0cc|CH3_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 3 Control and Status|
|0x0d0|CH3_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 3 CTRL register|
|0x0d4|CH3_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 3 READ_ADDR register|
|0x0d8|CH3_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 3 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x0dc|CH3_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 3 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x0e0|CH3_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 3 CTRL register|
|0x0e4|CH3_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 3 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x0e8|CH3_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 3 READ_ADDR register|
|0x0ec|CH3_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 3 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x0f0|CH3_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 3 CTRL register|
|0x0f4|CH3_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 3 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x0f8|CH3_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 3 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x0fc|CH3_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 3 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x100|CH4_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 4 Read Address pointer|
|0x104|CH4_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 4 Write Address pointer|



2.5. DMA

**103**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x108|CH4_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 4 Transfer Count|
|0x10c|CH4_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 4 Control and Status|
|0x110|CH4_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 4 CTRL register|
|0x114|CH4_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 4 READ_ADDR register|
|0x118|CH4_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 4 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x11c|CH4_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 4 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x120|CH4_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 4 CTRL register|
|0x124|CH4_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 4 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x128|CH4_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 4 READ_ADDR register|
|0x12c|CH4_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 4 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x130|CH4_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 4 CTRL register|
|0x134|CH4_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 4 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x138|CH4_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 4 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x13c|CH4_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 4 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x140|CH5_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 5 Read Address pointer|
|0x144|CH5_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 5 Write Address pointer|
|0x148|CH5_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 5 Transfer Count|
|0x14c|CH5_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 5 Control and Status|
|0x150|CH5_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 5 CTRL register|
|0x154|CH5_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 5 READ_ADDR register|
|0x158|CH5_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 5 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x15c|CH5_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 5 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x160|CH5_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 5 CTRL register|
|0x164|CH5_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 5 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x168|CH5_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 5 READ_ADDR register|
|0x16c|CH5_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 5 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x170|CH5_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 5 CTRL register|
|0x174|CH5_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 5 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x178|CH5_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 5 TRANS_COUNT register|



2.5. DMA

**104**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x17c|CH5_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 5 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x180|CH6_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 6 Read Address pointer|
|0x184|CH6_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 6 Write Address pointer|
|0x188|CH6_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 6 Transfer Count|
|0x18c|CH6_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 6 Control and Status|
|0x190|CH6_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 6 CTRL register|
|0x194|CH6_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 6 READ_ADDR register|
|0x198|CH6_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 6 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x19c|CH6_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 6 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x1a0|CH6_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 6 CTRL register|
|0x1a4|CH6_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 6 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x1a8|CH6_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 6 READ_ADDR register|
|0x1ac|CH6_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 6 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x1b0|CH6_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 6 CTRL register|
|0x1b4|CH6_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 6 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x1b8|CH6_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 6 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x1bc|CH6_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 6 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x1c0|CH7_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 7 Read Address pointer|
|0x1c4|CH7_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 7 Write Address pointer|
|0x1c8|CH7_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 7 Transfer Count|
|0x1cc|CH7_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 7 Control and Status|
|0x1d0|CH7_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 7 CTRL register|
|0x1d4|CH7_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 7 READ_ADDR register|
|0x1d8|CH7_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 7 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x1dc|CH7_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 7 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x1e0|CH7_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 7 CTRL register|
|0x1e4|CH7_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 7 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x1e8|CH7_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 7 READ_ADDR register|



2.5. DMA

**105**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x1ec|CH7_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 7 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x1f0|CH7_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 7 CTRL register|
|0x1f4|CH7_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 7 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x1f8|CH7_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 7 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x1fc|CH7_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 7 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x200|CH8_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 8 Read Address pointer|
|0x204|CH8_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 8 Write Address pointer|
|0x208|CH8_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 8 Transfer Count|
|0x20c|CH8_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 8 Control and Status|
|0x210|CH8_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 8 CTRL register|
|0x214|CH8_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 8 READ_ADDR register|
|0x218|CH8_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 8 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x21c|CH8_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 8 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x220|CH8_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 8 CTRL register|
|0x224|CH8_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 8 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x228|CH8_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 8 READ_ADDR register|
|0x22c|CH8_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 8 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x230|CH8_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 8 CTRL register|
|0x234|CH8_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 8 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x238|CH8_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 8 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x23c|CH8_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 8 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x240|CH9_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 9 Read Address pointer|
|0x244|CH9_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 9 Write Address pointer|
|0x248|CH9_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 9 Transfer Count|
|0x24c|CH9_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 9 Control and Status|
|0x250|CH9_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 9 CTRL register|
|0x254|CH9_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 9 READ_ADDR register|
|0x258|CH9_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 9 WRITE_ADDR register|



2.5. DMA

**106**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x25c|CH9_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 9 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x260|CH9_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 9 CTRL register|
|0x264|CH9_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 9 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x268|CH9_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 9 READ_ADDR register|
|0x26c|CH9_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 9 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x270|CH9_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 9 CTRL register|
|0x274|CH9_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 9 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x278|CH9_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 9 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x27c|CH9_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 9 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x280|CH10_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 10 Read Address pointer|
|0x284|CH10_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 10 Write Address pointer|
|0x288|CH10_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 10 Transfer Count|
|0x28c|CH10_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 10 Control and Status|
|0x290|CH10_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 10 CTRL register|
|0x294|CH10_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 10 READ_ADDR register|
|0x298|CH10_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 10 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x29c|CH10_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 10 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x2a0|CH10_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 10 CTRL register|
|0x2a4|CH10_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 10 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x2a8|CH10_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 10 READ_ADDR register|
|0x2ac|CH10_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 10 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x2b0|CH10_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 10 CTRL register|
|0x2b4|CH10_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 10 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x2b8|CH10_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 10 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x2bc|CH10_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 10 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x2c0|CH11_READ_ADDR|DMA Channel 11 Read Address pointer|
|0x2c4|CH11_WRITE_ADDR|DMA Channel 11 Write Address pointer|
|0x2c8|CH11_TRANS_COUNT|DMA Channel 11 Transfer Count|



2.5. DMA

**107**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x2cc|CH11_CTRL_TRIG|DMA Channel 11 Control and Status|
|0x2d0|CH11_AL1_CTRL|Alias for channel 11 CTRL register|
|0x2d4|CH11_AL1_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 11 READ_ADDR register|
|0x2d8|CH11_AL1_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 11 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x2dc|CH11_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG|Alias for channel 11 TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x2e0|CH11_AL2_CTRL|Alias for channel 11 CTRL register|
|0x2e4|CH11_AL2_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 11 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x2e8|CH11_AL2_READ_ADDR|Alias for channel 11 READ_ADDR register|
|0x2ec|CH11_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 11 WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x2f0|CH11_AL3_CTRL|Alias for channel 11 CTRL register|
|0x2f4|CH11_AL3_WRITE_ADDR|Alias for channel 11 WRITE_ADDR register|
|0x2f8|CH11_AL3_TRANS_COUNT|Alias for channel 11 TRANS_COUNT register|
|0x2fc|CH11_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG|Alias for channel 11 READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|
|0x400|INTR|Interrupt Status (raw)|
|0x404|INTE0|Interrupt Enables for IRQ 0|
|0x408|INTF0|Force Interrupts|
|0x40c|INTS0|Interrupt Status for IRQ 0|
|0x414|INTE1|Interrupt Enables for IRQ 1|
|0x418|INTF1|Force Interrupts for IRQ 1|
|0x41c|INTS1|Interrupt Status (masked) for IRQ 1|
|0x420|TIMER0|Pacing (X/Y) Fractional Timer<br>The pacing timer produces TREQ assertions at a rate set by<br>((X/Y) * sys_clk). This equation is evaluated every sys_clk cycles<br>and therefore can only generate TREQs at a rate of 1 per sys_clk<br>(i.e. permanent TREQ) or less.|
|0x424|TIMER1|Pacing (X/Y) Fractional Timer<br>The pacing timer produces TREQ assertions at a rate set by<br>((X/Y) * sys_clk). This equation is evaluated every sys_clk cycles<br>and therefore can only generate TREQs at a rate of 1 per sys_clk<br>(i.e. permanent TREQ) or less.|
|0x428|TIMER2|Pacing (X/Y) Fractional Timer<br>The pacing timer produces TREQ assertions at a rate set by<br>((X/Y) * sys_clk). This equation is evaluated every sys_clk cycles<br>and therefore can only generate TREQs at a rate of 1 per sys_clk<br>(i.e. permanent TREQ) or less.|



2.5. DMA

**108**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x42c|TIMER3|Pacing (X/Y) Fractional Timer<br>The pacing timer produces TREQ assertions at a rate set by<br>((X/Y) * sys_clk). This equation is evaluated every sys_clk cycles<br>and therefore can only generate TREQs at a rate of 1 per sys_clk<br>(i.e. permanent TREQ) or less.|
|0x430|MULTI_CHAN_TRIGGER|Trigger one or more channels simultaneously|
|0x434|SNIFF_CTRL|Sniffer Control|
|0x438|SNIFF_DATA|Data accumulator for sniff hardware|
|0x440|FIFO_LEVELS|Debug RAF, WAF, TDF levels|
|0x444|CHAN_ABORT|Abort an in-progress transfer sequence on one or more channels|
|0x448|N_CHANNELS|The number of channels this DMA instance is equipped with.<br>This DMA supports up to 16 hardware channels, but can be<br>configured with as few as one, to minimise silicon area.|
|0x800|CH0_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x804|CH0_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0x840|CH1_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x844|CH1_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0x880|CH2_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x884|CH2_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0x8c0|CH3_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x8c4|CH3_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0x900|CH4_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x904|CH4_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|



2.5. DMA

**109**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x940|CH5_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x944|CH5_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0x980|CH6_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x984|CH6_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0x9c0|CH7_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0x9c4|CH7_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0xa00|CH8_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0xa04|CH8_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0xa40|CH9_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0xa44|CH9_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0xa80|CH10_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0xa84|CH10_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|
|0xac0|CH11_DBG_CTDREQ|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the<br>DMA expects it can perform on the peripheral without<br>overflow/underflow. Write any value: clears the counter, and<br>cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|
|0xac4|CH11_DBG_TCR|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length<br>of the next transfer|



**DMA: CH0_READ_ADDR, CH1_READ_ADDR, …, CH10_READ_ADDR, CH11_READ_ADDR Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x000, 0x040, …, 0x280, 0x2c0

2.5. DMA

**110**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

DMA Channel _N_ Read Address pointer

|_Table 121._<br>_CH0_READ_ADDR,_<br>_CH1_READ_ADDR, …,_<br>_CH10_READ_ADDR,_<br>_CH11_READ_ADDR_<br>_Registers_<br>_Table 122._<br>_CH0_WRITE_ADDR,_<br>_CH1_WRITE_ADDR, …,_<br>_CH10_WRITE_ADDR,_<br>_CH11_WRITE_ADDR_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|This register updates automatically each time a read completes. The current<br>value is the next address to be read by this channel.|RW|0x00000000|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**CH1_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**CH11_WRITE_ADDR Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x004, 0x044, …, 0x284, 0x2c4<br>**Description**<br>DMA Channel_N_Write Address pointer||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|This register updates automatically each time a write completes. The current<br>value is the next address to be written by this channel.|RW|0x00000000|
||**DMA: CH0_TRANS_COUNT, CH1_TRANS_COUNT, …, CH10_TRANS_COUNT,**<br>**CH11_TRANS_COUNT Registers**||||



**Offsets** : 0x008, 0x048, …, 0x288, 0x2c8

## **Description**

DMA Channel _N_ Transfer Count

|_Table 123._<br>_CH0_TRANS_COUNT,_<br>_CH1_TRANS_COUNT,_<br>_…,_<br>_CH10_TRANS_COUNT,_<br>_CH11_TRANS_COUNT_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Program the number of bus transfers a channel will perform before halting.<br>Note that, if transfers are larger than one byte in size, this is not equal to the<br>number of bytes transferred (see CTRL_DATA_SIZE).<br>When the channel is active, reading this register shows the number of<br>transfers remaining, updating automatically each time a write transfer<br>completes.<br>Writing this register sets the RELOAD value for the transfer counter. Each time<br>this channel is triggered, the RELOAD value is copied into the live transfer<br>counter. The channel can be started multiple times, and will perform the same<br>number of transfers each time, as programmed by most recent write.<br>The RELOAD value can be observed at CHx_DBG_TCR. If TRANS_COUNT is<br>used as a trigger, the written value is used immediately as the length of the<br>new transfer sequence, as well as being written to RELOAD.|RW|0x00000000|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_CTRL_TRIG,**<br>**CH1_CTRL_TRIG,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_CTRL_TRIG,**<br>**CH11_CTRL_TRIG Registers**||||



**Offsets** : 0x00c, 0x04c, …, 0x28c, 0x2cc

## **Description**

DMA Channel _N_ Control and Status

2.5. DMA

**111**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 124._<br>_CH0_CTRL_TRIG,_<br>_CH1_CTRL_TRIG, …,_<br>_CH10_CTRL_TRIG,_<br>_CH11_CTRL_TRIG_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**AHB_ERROR**: Logical OR of the READ_ERROR and WRITE_ERROR flags. The<br>channel halts when it encounters any bus error, and always raises its channel<br>IRQ flag.|RO|0x0|
||30|**READ_ERROR**: If 1, the channel received a read bus error. Write one to clear.<br>READ_ADDR shows the approximate address where the bus error was<br>encountered (will not be earlier, or more than 3 transfers later)|WC|0x0|
||29|**WRITE_ERROR**: If 1, the channel received a write bus error. Write one to clear.<br>WRITE_ADDR shows the approximate address where the bus error was<br>encountered (will not be earlier, or more than 5 transfers later)|WC|0x0|
||28:25|Reserved.|-|-|
||24|**BUSY**: This flag goes high when the channel starts a new transfer sequence,<br>and low when the last transfer of that sequence completes. Clearing EN while<br>BUSY is high pauses the channel, and BUSY will stay high while paused.<br>To terminate a sequence early (and clear the BUSY flag), see CHAN_ABORT.|RO|0x0|
||23|**SNIFF_EN**: If 1, this channel’s data transfers are visible to the sniff hardware,<br>and each transfer will advance the state of the checksum. This only applies if<br>the sniff hardware is enabled, and has this channel selected.<br>This allows checksum to be enabled or disabled on a per-control- block basis.|RW|0x0|
||22|**BSWAP**: Apply byte-swap transformation to DMA data.<br>For byte data, this has no effect. For halfword data, the two bytes of each<br>halfword are swapped. For word data, the four bytes of each word are<br>swapped to reverse order.|RW|0x0|
||21|**IRQ_QUIET**: In QUIET mode, the channel does not generate IRQs at the end of<br>every transfer block. Instead, an IRQ is raised when NULL is written to a trigger<br>register, indicating the end of a control block chain.<br>This reduces the number of interrupts to be serviced by the CPU when<br>transferring a DMA chain of many small control blocks.|RW|0x0|
||20:15|**TREQ_SEL**: Select a Transfer Request signal.<br>The channel uses the transfer request signal to pace its data transfer rate.<br>Sources for TREQ signals are internal (TIMERS) or external (DREQ, a Data<br>Request from the system).<br>0x0 to 0x3a→select DREQ n as TREQ|RW|0x00|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x3b→TIMER0: Select Timer 0 as TREQ|||
|||0x3c→TIMER1: Select Timer 1 as TREQ|||
|||0x3d→TIMER2: Select Timer 2 as TREQ (Optional)|||
|||0x3e→TIMER3: Select Timer 3 as TREQ (Optional)|||
|||0x3f→PERMANENT: Permanent request, for unpaced transfers.|||
||14:11|**CHAIN_TO**: When this channel completes, it will trigger the channel indicated<br>by CHAIN_TO. Disable by setting CHAIN_TO =_(this channel)_.|RW|0x0|
||10|**RING_SEL**: Select whether RING_SIZE applies to read or write addresses.<br>If 0, read addresses are wrapped on a (1 << RING_SIZE) boundary. If 1, write<br>addresses are wrapped.|RW|0x0|



2.5. DMA

**112**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|9:6|**RING_SIZE**: Size of address wrap region. If 0, don’t wrap. For values n > 0, only<br>the lower n bits of the address will change. This wraps the address on a (1 <<<br>n) byte boundary, facilitating access to naturally-aligned ring buffers.<br>Ring sizes between 2 and 32768 bytes are possible. This can apply to either<br>read or write addresses, based on value of RING_SEL.|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→RING_NONE|||
|5|**INCR_WRITE**: If 1, the write address increments with each transfer. If 0, each<br>write is directed to the same, initial address.<br>Generally this should be disabled for memory-to-peripheral transfers.|RW|0x0|
|4|**INCR_READ**: If 1, the read address increments with each transfer. If 0, each<br>read is directed to the same, initial address.<br>Generally this should be disabled for peripheral-to-memory transfers.|RW|0x0|
|3:2|**DATA_SIZE**: Set the size of each bus transfer (byte/halfword/word).<br>READ_ADDR and WRITE_ADDR advance by this amount (1/2/4 bytes) with<br>each transfer.|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→SIZE_BYTE|||
||0x1→SIZE_HALFWORD|||
||0x2→SIZE_WORD|||
|1|**HIGH_PRIORITY**: HIGH_PRIORITY gives a channel preferential treatment in<br>issue scheduling: in each scheduling round, all high priority channels are<br>considered first, and then only a single low priority channel, before returning to<br>the high priority channels.<br>This only affects the order in which the DMA schedules channels. The DMA’s<br>bus priority is not changed. If the DMA is not saturated then a low priority<br>channel will see no loss of throughput.|RW|0x0|
|0|**EN**: DMA Channel Enable.<br>When 1, the channel will respond to triggering events, which will cause it to<br>become BUSY and start transferring data. When 0, the channel will ignore<br>triggers, stop issuing transfers, and pause the current transfer sequence (i.e.<br>BUSY will remain high if already high)|RW|0x0|



## **DMA: CH0_AL1_CTRL, CH1_AL1_CTRL, …, CH10_AL1_CTRL, CH11_AL1_CTRL Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x010, 0x050, …, 0x290, 0x2d0

2.5. DMA

**113**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 125._<br>_CH0_AL1_CTRL,_<br>_CH1_AL1_CTRL, …,_<br>_CH10_AL1_CTRL,_<br>_CH11_AL1_CTRL_<br>_Registers_<br>_Table 126._<br>_CH0_AL1_READ_ADDR_<br>_,_<br>_CH1_AL1_READ_ADDR_<br>_, …,_<br>_CH10_AL1_READ_ADD_<br>_R,_<br>_CH11_AL1_READ_ADD_<br>_R Registers_<br>_Table 127._<br>_CH0_AL1_WRITE_ADD_<br>_R,_<br>_CH1_AL1_WRITE_ADD_<br>_R, …,_<br>_CH10_AL1_WRITE_AD_<br>_DR,_<br>_CH11_AL1_WRITE_AD_<br>_DR Registers_<br>_Table 128._<br>_CH0_AL1_TRANS_COU_<br>_NT_TRIG,_<br>_CH1_AL1_TRANS_COU_<br>_NT_TRIG, …,_<br>_CH10_AL1_TRANS_CO_<br>_UNT_TRIG,_<br>_CH11_AL1_TRANS_CO_<br>_UNT_TRIG Registers_<br>_Table 129._<br>_CH0_AL2_CTRL,_<br>_CH1_AL2_CTRL, …,_<br>_CH10_AL2_CTRL,_<br>_CH11_AL2_CTRL_<br>_Registers_<br>_Table 130._<br>_CH0_AL2_TRANS_COU_<br>_NT,_<br>_CH1_AL2_TRANS_COU_<br>_NT, …,_<br>_CH10_AL2_TRANS_CO_<br>_UNT,_<br>_CH11_AL2_TRANS_CO_<br>_UNT Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_CTRL register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL1_READ_ADDR,**<br>**CH1_AL1_READ_ADDR,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL1_READ_ADDR, CH11_AL1_READ_ADDR Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x014, 0x054, …, 0x294, 0x2d4||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_READ_ADDR register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL1_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**CH1_AL1_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL1_WRITE_ADDR, CH11_AL1_WRITE_ADDR Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x018, 0x058, …, 0x298, 0x2d8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_WRITE_ADDR register|RW|-|
||**DMA: CH0_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG, CH1_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG, …,**<br>**CH10_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG, CH11_AL1_TRANS_COUNT_TRIG Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x01c, 0x05c, …, 0x29c, 0x2dc||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_TRANS_COUNT register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|RW|-|
||**DMA: CH0_AL2_CTRL, CH1_AL2_CTRL, …, CH10_AL2_CTRL, CH11_AL2_CTRL**<br>**Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x020, 0x060, …, 0x2a0, 0x2e0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_CTRL register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL2_TRANS_COUNT,**<br>**CH1_AL2_TRANS_COUNT,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL2_TRANS_COUNT, CH11_AL2_TRANS_COUNT Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x024, 0x064, …, 0x2a4, 0x2e4||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_TRANS_COUNT register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL2_READ_ADDR,**<br>**CH1_AL2_READ_ADDR,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL2_READ_ADDR, CH11_AL2_READ_ADDR Registers**||||



**Offsets** : 0x028, 0x068, …, 0x2a8, 0x2e8

2.5. DMA

**114**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 131._<br>_CH0_AL2_READ_ADDR_<br>_,_<br>_CH1_AL2_READ_ADDR_<br>_, …,_<br>_CH10_AL2_READ_ADD_<br>_R,_<br>_CH11_AL2_READ_ADD_<br>_R Registers_<br>_Table 132._<br>_CH0_AL2_WRITE_ADD_<br>_R_TRIG,_<br>_CH1_AL2_WRITE_ADD_<br>_R_TRIG, …,_<br>_CH10_AL2_WRITE_AD_<br>_DR_TRIG,_<br>_CH11_AL2_WRITE_AD_<br>_DR_TRIG Registers_<br>_Table 133._<br>_CH0_AL3_CTRL,_<br>_CH1_AL3_CTRL, …,_<br>_CH10_AL3_CTRL,_<br>_CH11_AL3_CTRL_<br>_Registers_<br>_Table 134._<br>_CH0_AL3_WRITE_ADD_<br>_R,_<br>_CH1_AL3_WRITE_ADD_<br>_R, …,_<br>_CH10_AL3_WRITE_AD_<br>_DR,_<br>_CH11_AL3_WRITE_AD_<br>_DR Registers_<br>_Table 135._<br>_CH0_AL3_TRANS_COU_<br>_NT,_<br>_CH1_AL3_TRANS_COU_<br>_NT, …,_<br>_CH10_AL3_TRANS_CO_<br>_UNT,_<br>_CH11_AL3_TRANS_CO_<br>_UNT Registers_<br>_Table 136._<br>_CH0_AL3_READ_ADDR_<br>__TRIG,_<br>_CH1_AL3_READ_ADDR_<br>__TRIG, …,_<br>_CH10_AL3_READ_ADD_<br>_R_TRIG,_<br>_CH11_AL3_READ_ADD_<br>_R_TRIG Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_READ_ADDR register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG,**<br>**CH1_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG, CH11_AL2_WRITE_ADDR_TRIG Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x02c, 0x06c, …, 0x2ac, 0x2ec||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_WRITE_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|RW|-|
||**DMA: CH0_AL3_CTRL, CH1_AL3_CTRL, …, CH10_AL3_CTRL, CH11_AL3_CTRL**<br>**Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x030, 0x070, …, 0x2b0, 0x2f0||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_CTRL register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL3_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**CH1_AL3_WRITE_ADDR,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL3_WRITE_ADDR, CH11_AL3_WRITE_ADDR Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x034, 0x074, …, 0x2b4, 0x2f4||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_WRITE_ADDR register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL3_TRANS_COUNT,**<br>**CH1_AL3_TRANS_COUNT,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL3_TRANS_COUNT, CH11_AL3_TRANS_COUNT Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x038, 0x078, …, 0x2b8, 0x2f8||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_TRANS_COUNT register|RW|-|
||**DMA: **<br>**CH0_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG,**<br>**CH1_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG,**<br>**…,**<br>**CH10_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG, CH11_AL3_READ_ADDR_TRIG Registers**<br>**Offsets**: 0x03c, 0x07c, …, 0x2bc, 0x2fc||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|Alias for channel_N_READ_ADDR register<br>This is a trigger register (0xc). Writing a nonzero value will<br>reload the channel counter and start the channel.|RW|-|
||**DMA: INTR Register**||||



**Offset** : 0x400

**Description**

Interrupt Status (raw)

2.5. DMA

**115**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 137. INTR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:0|Raw interrupt status for DMA Channels 0..15. Bit n corresponds to channel n.<br>Ignores any masking or forcing. Channel interrupts can be cleared by writing a<br>bit mask to INTR, INTS0 or INTS1.<br>Channel interrupts can be routed to either of two system-level IRQs based on<br>INTE0 and INTE1.<br>This can be used vector different channel interrupts to different ISRs: this<br>might be done to allow NVIC IRQ preemption for more time-critical channels,<br>or to spread IRQ load across different cores.<br>It is also valid to ignore this behaviour and just use INTE0/INTS0/IRQ 0.|WC|0x0000|



## **DMA: INTE0 Register**

**Offset** : 0x404

## **Description**

Interrupt Enables for IRQ 0

|_Table 138. INTE0_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Set bit n to pass interrupts from channel n to DMA IRQ 0.|RW|0x0000|



## **DMA: INTF0 Register**

**Offset** : 0x408

## **Description**

Force Interrupts

|_Table 139. INTF0_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Write 1s to force the corresponding bits in INTE0. The interrupt remains<br>asserted until INTF0 is cleared.|RW|0x0000|



## **DMA: INTS0 Register**

**Offset** : 0x40c

## **Description**

Interrupt Status for IRQ 0

2.5. DMA

**116**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 140. INTS0 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:0|Indicates active channel interrupt requests which are currently causing IRQ 0<br>to be asserted.<br>Channel interrupts can be cleared by writing a bit mask here.|WC|0x0000|



## **DMA: INTE1 Register**

**Offset** : 0x414

## **Description**

Interrupt Enables for IRQ 1

|_Table 141. INTE1_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Set bit n to pass interrupts from channel n to DMA IRQ 1.|RW|0x0000|



## **DMA: INTF1 Register**

**Offset** : 0x418

## **Description**

Force Interrupts for IRQ 1

_Table 142. INTF1 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:0|Write 1s to force the corresponding bits in INTE0. The interrupt remains<br>asserted until INTF0 is cleared.|RW|0x0000|



## **DMA: INTS1 Register**

**Offset** : 0x41c

## **Description**

Interrupt Status (masked) for IRQ 1

_Table 143. INTS1 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:0|Indicates active channel interrupt requests which are currently causing IRQ 1<br>to be asserted.<br>Channel interrupts can be cleared by writing a bit mask here.|WC|0x0000|



## **DMA: TIMER0, TIMER1, TIMER2, TIMER3 Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x420, 0x424, 0x428, 0x42c

## **Description**

Pacing (X/Y) Fractional Timer

The pacing timer produces TREQ assertions at a rate set by ((X/Y) * sys_clk). This equation is evaluated every sys_clk cycles and therefore can only generate TREQs at a rate of 1 per sys_clk (i.e. permanent TREQ) or less.

_Table 144. TIMER0, TIMER1, TIMER2, TIMER3 Registers_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|**X**: Pacing Timer Dividend. Specifies the X value for the (X/Y) fractional timer.|RW|0x0000|



2.5. DMA

**117**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|15:0|**Y**: Pacing Timer Divisor. Specifies the Y value for the (X/Y) fractional timer.|RW|0x0000|



## **DMA: MULTI_CHAN_TRIGGER Register**

**Offset** : 0x430

## **Description**

Trigger one or more channels simultaneously

|_Table 145._<br>_MULTI_CHAN_TRIGGE_<br>_R Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Each bit in this register corresponds to a DMA channel. Writing a 1 to the<br>relevant bit is the same as writing to that channel’s trigger register; the<br>channel will start if it is currently enabled and not already busy.|SC|0x0000|



## **DMA: SNIFF_CTRL Register**

**Offset** : 0x434

## **Description**

Sniffer Control

|_Table 146._<br>_SNIFF_CTRL Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
||11|**OUT_INV**: If set, the result appears inverted (bitwise complement) when read.<br>This does not affect the way the checksum is calculated; the result is<br>transformed on-the-fly between the result register and the bus.|RW|0x0|
||10|**OUT_REV**: If set, the result appears bit-reversed when read. This does not<br>affect the way the checksum is calculated; the result is transformed on-the-fly<br>between the result register and the bus.|RW|0x0|
||9|**BSWAP**: Locally perform a byte reverse on the sniffed data, before feeding into<br>checksum.<br>Note that the sniff hardware is downstream of the DMA channel byteswap<br>performed in the read master: if channel CTRL_BSWAP and<br>SNIFF_CTRL_BSWAP are both enabled, their effects cancel from the sniffer’s<br>point of view.|RW|0x0|
||8:5|**CALC**|RW|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→CRC32: Calculate a CRC-32 (IEEE802.3 polynomial)|||
|||0x1→CRC32R: Calculate a CRC-32 (IEEE802.3 polynomial) with bit reversed<br>data|||
|||0x2→CRC16: Calculate a CRC-16-CCITT|||
|||0x3→CRC16R: Calculate a CRC-16-CCITT with bit reversed data|||
|||0xe→EVEN: XOR reduction over all data. == 1 if the total 1 population count<br>is odd.|||
|||0xf→SUM: Calculate a simple 32-bit checksum (addition with a 32 bit<br>accumulator)|||



2.5. DMA

**118**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|4:1|**DMACH**: DMA channel for Sniffer to observe|RW|0x0|
|0|**EN**: Enable sniffer|RW|0x0|



## **DMA: SNIFF_DATA Register**

**Offset** : 0x438

## **Description**

Data accumulator for sniff hardware

_Table 147. SNIFF_DATA Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|Write an initial seed value here before starting a DMA transfer on the channel<br>indicated by SNIFF_CTRL_DMACH. The hardware will update this register each<br>time it observes a read from the indicated channel. Once the channel<br>completes, the final result can be read from this register.|RW|0x00000000|



## **DMA: FIFO_LEVELS Register**

**Offset** : 0x440

## **Description**

Debug RAF, WAF, TDF levels

|_Table 148._<br>_FIFO_LEVELS Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:16|**RAF_LVL**: Current Read-Address-FIFO fill level|RO|0x00|
||15:8|**WAF_LVL**: Current Write-Address-FIFO fill level|RO|0x00|
||7:0|**TDF_LVL**: Current Transfer-Data-FIFO fill level|RO|0x00|



## **DMA: CHAN_ABORT Register**

**Offset** : 0x444

## **Description**

Abort an in-progress transfer sequence on one or more channels

|_Table 149._<br>_CHAN_ABORT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Each bit corresponds to a channel. Writing a 1 aborts whatever transfer<br>sequence is in progress on that channel. The bit will remain high until any in-<br>flight transfers have been flushed through the address and data FIFOs.<br>After writing, this register must be polled until it returns all-zero. Until this<br>point, it is unsafe to restart the channel.|SC|0x0000|



## **DMA: N_CHANNELS Register**

## **Offset** : 0x448

|_Table 150._<br>_N_CHANNELS Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:5|Reserved.|-|-|



2.5. DMA

**119**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|4:0|The number of channels this DMA instance is equipped with. This DMA<br>supports up to 16 hardware channels, but can be configured with as few as<br>one, to minimise silicon area.|RO|-|



## **DMA: CH0_DBG_CTDREQ, CH1_DBG_CTDREQ, …, CH10_DBG_CTDREQ, CH11_DBG_CTDREQ Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x800, 0x840, …, 0xa80, 0xac0

|_Table 151._<br>_CH0_DBG_CTDREQ,_<br>_CH1_DBG_CTDREQ, …,_<br>_CH10_DBG_CTDREQ,_<br>_CH11_DBG_CTDREQ_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|Read: get channel DREQ counter (i.e. how many accesses the DMA expects it<br>can perform on the peripheral without overflow/underflow. Write any value:<br>clears the counter, and cause channel to re-initiate DREQ handshake.|WC|0x00|



## **DMA: CH0_DBG_TCR, CH1_DBG_TCR, …, CH10_DBG_TCR, CH11_DBG_TCR Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x804, 0x844, …, 0xa84, 0xac4

|_Table 152._<br>_CH0_DBG_TCR,_<br>_CH1_DBG_TCR, …,_<br>_CH10_DBG_TCR,_<br>_CH11_DBG_TCR_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|Read to get channel TRANS_COUNT reload value, i.e. the length of the next<br>transfer|RO|0x00000000|
||||||
