## **2.6. Memory**

RP2040 has embedded ROM and SRAM, and access to external Flash via a QSPI interface. Details of internal memory are given below.

## **2.6.1. ROM**

A 16kB read-only memory (ROM) is at address 0x00000000. The ROM contents are fixed at the time the silicon is manufactured. It contains:

- [Initial startup routine]

- [Flash boot sequence]

- [Flash programming routines]

- [USB mass storage device with UF2 support]

- [Utility libraries such as fast floating point]

The boot sequence of the chip is defined in Section 2.8.1, and the ROM contents is described in more detail in Section 2.8. The full source code for the RP2040 bootrom is available at:

pico-bootrom

The ROM offers single-cycle read-only bus access, and is on a dedicated AHB-Lite arbiter, so it can be accessed simultaneously with other memory devices. Attempting to write to the ROM has no effect (no bus fault is generated).

2.6. Memory

**120**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.6.2. SRAM**

There is a total of 264kB of on-chip SRAM. Physically this is partitioned into six banks, as this vastly improves memory bandwidth for multiple masters, but software may treat it as a single 264kB memory region. There are no restrictions on what is stored in each bank: processor code, data buffers, or a mixture. There are four 16k x 32-bit banks (64kB each) and two 1k x 32-bit banks (4kB each).

##  **IMPORTANT**

Banking is a _physical_ partitioning of SRAM which improves performance by allowing multiple simultaneous accesses. _Logically_ there is a single 264kB contiguous memory.

Each SRAM bank is accessed via a dedicated AHB-Lite arbiter. This means different bus masters can access different SRAM banks in parallel, so up to four 32-bit SRAM accesses can take place every system clock cycle (one per master).

SRAM is mapped to system addresses starting at 0x20000000. The first 256kB address region is word-striped across the four larger banks, which provides a significant memory parallelism benefits for most use cases.

Consecutive words in the system address space are routed to different RAM banks as shown in Table 153.

_Table 153. SRAM bank0/1/2/3 striped mapping._

|**System address**|**SRAM Bank**|**SRAM word address**|
|---|---|---|
|0x20000000|Bank 0|0|
|0x20000004|Bank 1|0|
|0x20000008|Bank 2|0|
|0x2000000c|Bank 3|0|
|0x20000010|Bank 0|1|
|0x20000014|Bank 1|1|
|0x20000018|Bank 2|1|
|0x2000001c|Bank 3|1|
|0x20000020|Bank 0|2|
|0x20000024|Bank 1|2|
|0x20000028|Bank 2|2|
|0x2000002c|Bank 3|2|
|etc|||



The next two 4kB regions (starting at 0x20040000 and 0x20041000) are mapped directly to the smaller, 4kB memory banks. Software _may_ choose to use these for per-core purposes, e.g. stack and frequently-executed code, guaranteeing that the processors never stall on these accesses. However, like all SRAM on RP2040, these banks have single-cycle access from _all_ masters providing no other masters are accessing the bank in the same cycle, so it is reasonable to treat memory as a single 264kB device.

The four 64kB banks are also available at a non-striped mirror. The four 64kB regions starting at 0x21000000, 0x21010000, 0x21020000, 0x21030000 are each mapped directly to one of the four 64kB SRAM banks. Software can explicitly allocate data and code across the physical memory banks, for improved memory performance in exceptionally demanding cases. This is often unnecessary, as memory striping usually provides sufficient parallelism with less software complexity.

The non-striped mirror starts at an offset of +16MB above the base of SRAM, as this is the maximum offset that allows ARMv6M subroutine calls between the smaller banks and the non-striped larger banks.

2.6. Memory

**121**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.6.2.1. Other On-chip Memory**

Besides the 264kB main memory, there are two other dedicated RAM blocks that may be used in some circumstances:

- [If flash XIP caching is disabled, the cache becomes available as a 16kB memory starting at ][0x15000000]

- [If the USB is not used, the USB data DPRAM can be used as a 4kB memory starting at ][0x50100000]

This gives a total of 284kB of on-chip SRAM. There are no restrictions on how these memories are used, e.g. it is possible to execute code from the USB data RAM if you choose.

## **2.6.3. Flash**

External Flash is accessed via the QSPI interface using the execute-in-place (XIP) hardware. This allows an external flash memory to be addressed and accessed by the system as though it were internal memory. Bus reads to a 16MB memory window starting at 0x10000000 are translated into a serial flash transfer, and the result is returned to the master that initiated the read. This process is transparent to the master, so a processor can execute code from the external flash without first copying the code to internal memory, hence "execute in place". An internal cache remembers the contents of recently-accessed flash locations, which accelerates the average bandwidth and latency of the interface.

Once correctly configured by RP2040’s bootrom and the flash second stage, the XIP hardware is largely transparent, and software can treat flash as a large read-only memory. However, it does provide a number of additional features to serve more demanding software use cases.

_Figure 14. Flash execute-in-place (XIP) subsystem. System accesses via the main AHB-Lite slave are decoded to determine if they are XIP accesses, direct accesses to the SSI e.g. for configuration, or accesses to various other hardware and control registers in the XIP subsystem. XIP accesses are first looked up in the cache, to accelerate accesses to recentlyused data. If the data is not found in the cache, an external serial access is generated via the SSI,_  **NOTE** _and the resulting data is stored in the cache and forwarded on to the system bus._

**==> picture [92 x 179] intentionally omitted <==**

The serial flash interface is configured by the flash second stage when using the SDK to run at an integer divider of the system clock. All the included second stage boot implementations support a PICO_FLASH_SPI_CLKDIV setting (e.g. defaulted to 4 in https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2040/boot_stage2/boot2_w25q080.S to make the default interface speed 125/4 = 31.25MHz). This divider can be overridden by specifying PICO_FLASH_SPI_CLKDIV in the particular board config header used with the SDK.

## **2.6.3.1. XIP Cache**

The cache is 16kB, two way set-associative, 1 cycle hit. It is internal to the XIP subsystem, and only affects accesses to XIP flash, so software does not have to consider cache coherence, unless performing flash programming operations. It caches reads from a 24-bit flash address space, which is mirrored multiple times in the RP2040 address space, each alias having different caching behaviour. The eight MSBs of the system address are used for segment decode, leaving 24 bits for flash addressing, so the maximum supported flash size (for XIP operation) is 16MB. The available mirrors

2.6. Memory

**122**

RP2040 Datasheet

## are:

- [0x10…][ XIP access, cacheable, allocating - Normal cache operation]

- [0x11…][ XIP access, cacheable, non-allocating - Check for hit, don’t update cache on miss]

- [0x12…][ XIP access, non-cacheable, allocating - Don’t check for hit, always update cache]

- [0x13…][ XIP access, non-cacheable, non-allocating - Bypass cache completely]

- [0x15…][ Use XIP cache as SRAM bank, mirrored across entire segment]

If the cache is disabled, via the CTRL.EN register bit, then all four of the XIP aliases (0x10 to 0x13) will bypass the cache, and access the flash directly. This has a significant impact on XIP code execution performance.

Access to the 0x15… segment produces a bus error unless the cache is disabled by clearing CTRL.EN. Once the cache is disabled, this region behaves as an additional 16kB SRAM bank. Reads and writes are one cycle, but there is a wait state on consecutive write-read sequences, i.e. there is no write forwarding buffer.

## **2.6.3.2. Cache Flushing and Maintenance**

The FLUSH register allows the entire cache contents to be flushed. This is necessary if software has reprogrammed the flash contents, and needs to clear out stale data and code, without performing a reboot. Cache flushes are triggered either manually by writing 1 to FLUSH, or automatically when the XIP block is brought out of reset. The flush is implemented by zeroing the cache tag memory using an internal counter, which takes just over 1024 clock cycles (16kB total size / 8 bytes per line / 2 ways per set).

Flushing the cache whilst accessing flash data (perhaps initiating the flush on one core whilst another core may be executing code from flash) is a safe operation, but any master accessing flash data while the flush is in progress will be stalled until completion.

##  **CAUTION**

The cache-as-SRAM alias (0x15…) must not be written whilst a cache flush is in progress. Before writing for the first time, if a cache flush has recently been initiated (e.g. via a watchdog reset), a dummy read from FLUSH is recommended to ensure the cache flush has completed. Writing to cache-as-SRAM whilst a flush is in progress can corrupt the data memory contents.

A complete cache flush dramatically slows subsequent code execution, until the cache "warms up" again. There is an alternative, which allows cache contents corresponding to only a certain address range to be invalidated. A write to the 0x10… mirror will look up the addressed location in the cache, and delete any matching entry found. Writing to all wordaligned locations in an address range (e.g. a flash sector that has just been erased and reprogrammed) therefore eliminates the possibility of stale cached data in this range, without suffering the effects of a complete cache flush.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/flash/cache_perfctr/flash_cache_perfctr.c Lines 30 - 55_

30 _// Flush cache to make sure we miss the first time we access test_data_ 31     xip_ctrl_hw->flush = 1; 32     while (!(xip_ctrl_hw->stat & XIP_STAT_FLUSH_READY_BITS)) 33         tight_loop_contents(); 34 35 _// Clear counters (write any value to clear)_ 36     xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_acc = 1; 37     xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_hit = 1; 38 39     (void) *test_data_ptr; 40     check(xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_hit == 0 && xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_acc == 1, 41           "First access to data should miss"); 42 43     (void) *test_data_ptr; 44     check(xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_hit == 1 && xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_acc == 2,

2.6. Memory

**123**

RP2040 Datasheet

45           "Second access to data should hit"); 46 47 _// Write to invalidate individual cache lines (64 bits)_ 48 _// Writes must be directed to the cacheable, allocatable alias (address 0x10.._....)_ 49     *test_data_ptr = 0; 50     (void) *test_data_ptr; 51     check(xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_hit == 1 && xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_acc == 3, 52           "Should miss after invalidation"); 53     (void) *test_data_ptr; 54     check(xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_hit == 2 && xip_ctrl_hw->ctr_acc == 4, 55           "Second access after invalidation should hit again");

## **2.6.3.3. SSI**

The execute-in-place functionality is provided by the SSI interface, documented in Section 4.10. It supports 1, 2 or 4-bit SPI flash interfaces (SPI, DSPI and QSPI), and can insert either an instruction prefix or mode continuation bits on each XIP access. This includes the possibility of issuing a standard 03h serial flash read command for each access, allowing virtually any serial flash device to be used. The maximum SPI clock frequency is half the system clock frequency.

The SSI can also be used as a standard FIFO-based SPI master, with DMA support. This mode is used by the bootrom to extract the second stage bootloader from external flash (see Section 2.8.1). The bus interposer allows an atomic set, clear or XOR operation to be posted to SSI control registers, in the same manner as other memory-mapped IO on RP2040. This is described in more detail in Section 2.1.2.

## **2.6.3.4. Flash Streaming and Auxiliary Bus Slave**

As the flash is generally much larger than SRAM, it’s often useful to stream chunks of data into memory from flash. It’s convenient to have the DMA stream this data in the background while software in the foreground is doing other things, and it’s even more convenient if code can continue to execute from flash whilst this takes place.

This doesn’t interact well with standard XIP operation, because of the lengthy bus stalls forced on the DMA whilst the SSI is performing serial transfers. These stalls are tolerable for a processor, because an in-order processor tends to have nothing better to do while waiting for an instruction fetch to retire, and because typical code execution tends to have much higher cache hit rates than bulk streaming of infrequently accessed data. In contrast, stalling the DMA prevents any _other_ active DMA channels from making progress during this time, which slows overall DMA throughput.

The STREAM_ADDR and STREAM_CTR registers are used to program a linear sequence of flash reads, which the XIP subsystem will perform in the background in a best-effort fashion. To minimise impact on code being executed from flash whilst the stream is ongoing, the streaming hardware has lower priority access to the SSI than regular XIP accesses, and there is a brief cooldown (seven cycles) between the last XIP cache miss and resuming streaming. This helps to avoid increase in initial access latency on XIP cache miss.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/flash/xip_stream/flash_xip_stream.c Lines 45 - 48_

45     while (!(xip_ctrl_hw->stat & XIP_STAT_FIFO_EMPTY)) 46         (void) xip_ctrl_hw->stream_fifo; 47     xip_ctrl_hw->stream_addr = (uint32_t) &random_test_data[0]; 48     xip_ctrl_hw->stream_ctr = count_of(random_test_data);

The streamed data is pushed to a small FIFO, which generates DREQ signals, telling the DMA to collect the streamed data. As the DMA does not initiate a read until _after_ the data has been read from flash, the DMA is not stalled when accessing the data.

Although this scheme ensures that the data is ready in the streaming FIFO once the DREQ is asserted, the DMA can still be stalled if another master is currently stalled on the XIP slave, e.g. due to a cache miss. This is solved by the auxiliary bus slave, which is a simple bus interface providing access only to the streaming FIFO. This slave is exposed on the

2.6. Memory

**124**

RP2040 Datasheet

FASTPERI arbiter, which services only native AHB-Lite peripherals which don’t generate wait states, so the DMA will never experience stalls when accessing the FIFO at this address, assuming it has high bus priority.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/flash/xip_stream/flash_xip_stream.c Lines 58 - 70_

58     const uint dma_chan = 0; 59     dma_channel_config cfg = dma_channel_get_default_config(dma_chan); 60     channel_config_set_read_increment(&cfg, false); 61     channel_config_set_write_increment(&cfg, true); 62     channel_config_set_dreq(&cfg, DREQ_XIP_STREAM); 63     dma_channel_configure( 64             dma_chan, 65             &cfg, 66             (void *) buf, _// Write addr_ 67             (const void *) XIP_AUX_BASE, _// Read addr_ 68             count_of(random_test_data), _// Transfer count_ 69             true _// Start immediately!_ 70     );

## **2.6.3.5. Performance Counters**

The XIP subsystem provides two performance counters. These are 32 bits in size, saturate upon reaching 0xffffffff, and are cleared by writing any value. They count:

1. The total number of XIP accesses, to any alias

2. The number of XIP accesses which resulted in a cache hit

For common use cases, this allows the cache hit rate to be profiled.

## **2.6.3.6. List of XIP Registers**

The XIP registers start at a base address of 0x14000000 (defined as XIP_CTRL_BASE in SDK).

_Table 154. List of XIP registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|CTRL|Cache control|
|0x04|FLUSH|Cache Flush control|
|0x08|STAT|Cache Status|
|0x0c|CTR_HIT|Cache Hit counter|
|0x10|CTR_ACC|Cache Access counter|
|0x14|STREAM_ADDR|FIFO stream address|
|0x18|STREAM_CTR|FIFO stream control|
|0x1c|STREAM_FIFO|FIFO stream data|



## **XIP: CTRL Register**

**Offset** : 0x00

**Description**

Cache control

2.6. Memory

**125**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 155. CTRL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3|**POWER_DOWN**: When 1, the cache memories are powered down. They retain<br>state,<br>but can not be accessed. This reduces static power dissipation.<br>Writing 1 to this bit forces CTRL_EN to 0, i.e. the cache cannot<br>be enabled when powered down.<br>Cache-as-SRAM accesses will produce a bus error response when<br>the cache is powered down.|RW|0x0|
|2|Reserved.|-|-|
|1|**ERR_BADWRITE**: When 1, writes to any alias other than 0x0 (caching,<br>allocating)<br>will produce a bus fault. When 0, these writes are silently ignored.<br>In either case, writes to the 0x0 alias will deallocate on tag match,<br>as usual.|RW|0x1|
|0|**EN**: When 1, enable the cache. When the cache is disabled, all XIP accesses<br>will go straight to the flash, without querying the cache. When enabled,<br>cacheable XIP accesses will query the cache, and the flash will<br>not be accessed if the tag matches and the valid bit is set.<br>If the cache is enabled, cache-as-SRAM accesses have no effect on the<br>cache data RAM, and will produce a bus error response.|RW|0x1|



## **XIP: FLUSH Register**

**Offset** : 0x04

## **Description**

Cache Flush control

|_Table 156. FLUSH_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|Write 1 to flush the cache. This clears the tag memory, but<br>the data memory retains its contents. (This means cache-as-SRAM<br>contents is not affected by flush or reset.)<br>Reading will hold the bus (stall the processor) until the flush<br>completes. Alternatively STAT can be polled until completion.|SC|0x0|



## **XIP: STAT Register**

**Offset** : 0x08

## **Description**

Cache Status

_Table 157. STAT Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**FIFO_FULL**: When 1, indicates the XIP streaming FIFO is completely full.<br>The streaming FIFO is 2 entries deep, so the full and empty<br>flag allow its level to be ascertained.|RO|0x0|
|1|**FIFO_EMPTY**: When 1, indicates the XIP streaming FIFO is completely empty.|RO|0x1|



2.6. Memory

**126**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|**FLUSH_READY**: Reads as 0 while a cache flush is in progress, and 1 otherwise.<br>The cache is flushed whenever the XIP block is reset, and also<br>when requested via the FLUSH register.|RO|0x0|



## **XIP: CTR_HIT Register**

**Offset** : 0x0c **Description**

Cache Hit counter

|_Table 158. CTR_HIT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|A 32 bit saturating counter that increments upon each cache hit,<br>i.e. when an XIP access is serviced directly from cached data.<br>Write any value to clear.|WC|0x00000000|
||**XIP: CTR_ACC Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x10||||



## **Description**

Cache Access counter

|_Table 159. CTR_ACC_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|A 32 bit saturating counter that increments upon each XIP access,<br>whether the cache is hit or not. This includes noncacheable accesses.<br>Write any value to clear.|WC|0x00000000|



## **XIP: STREAM_ADDR Register**

**Offset** : 0x14 **Description**

FIFO stream address

|_Table 160._<br>_STREAM_ADDR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:2|The address of the next word to be streamed from flash to the streaming<br>FIFO.<br>Increments automatically after each flash access.<br>Write the initial access address here before starting a streaming read.|RW|0x00000000|
||1:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **XIP: STREAM_CTR Register**

**Offset** : 0x18 **Description**

FIFO stream control

|_Table 161._<br>_STREAM_CTR Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:22|Reserved.|-|-|



2.6. Memory

**127**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|21:0|Write a nonzero value to start a streaming read. This will then<br>progress in the background, using flash idle cycles to transfer<br>a linear data block from flash to the streaming FIFO.<br>Decrements automatically (1 at a time) as the stream<br>progresses, and halts on reaching 0.<br>Write 0 to halt an in-progress stream, and discard any in-flight<br>read, so that a new stream can immediately be started (after<br>draining the FIFO and reinitialising STREAM_ADDR)|RW|0x000000|



## **XIP: STREAM_FIFO Register**

**Offset** : 0x1c

## **Description**

FIFO stream data

_Table 162. STREAM_FIFO Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|Streamed data is buffered here, for retrieval by the system DMA.<br>This FIFO can also be accessed via the XIP_AUX slave, to avoid exposing<br>the DMA to bus stalls caused by other XIP traffic.|RF|0x00000000|
