## **2.8. Bootrom**

The Bootrom size is limited to 16kB. It contains:

- [Processor core 0 initial boot sequence.]

- [Processor core 1 low power wait and launch protocol.]

- [USB MSC class-compliant bootloader with ][UF2][ support for downloading code/data to FLASH or RAM.]

- [USB PICOBOOT bootloader interface for advanced management.]

2.7. Boot Sequence

**128**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Routines for programming and manipulating the external flash.]

- [Fast floating point library.]

- [Fast bit counting / manipulation functions.]

- [Fast memory fill / copy functions.]

## **Bootrom Source Code**

The full source for the RP2040 bootrom can be found at https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-bootrom.

This includes versions 1, 2 and 3 of the bootrom, which correspond to the B0, B1 and B2 silicon revisions, respectively.

## **2.8.1. Processor Controlled Boot Sequence**

A flow diagram of the boot sequence is given in Figure 15.

_Figure 15. RP2040 Boot Sequence_

**==> picture [297 x 303] intentionally omitted <==**

After the hardware controlled boot sequence described in Section 2.7, the processor controlled boot sequence starts:

- [Reset to both processors released: both enter ROM at same location]

- [Processors check SIO.CPUID]

   - [Processor 1 goes to sleep (WFE with SCR.SLEEPDEEP enabled) and remains asleep until woken by user code,] via the mailbox

   - [Processor 0 continues executing from ROM]

- [If power up event was from Rescue DP, clear this flag and ] **[halt immediately]**

   - [The debug host (which initiated the rescue) will provide further instruction.]

- [If watchdog scratch registers set to indicate pre-loaded code exists in SRAM, jump to that code]

2.8. Bootrom

**129**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Check if SPI CS pin is tied low ("bootrom button"), and skip flash boot if so.]

- [Set up IO muxing, pad controls on QSPI pins, and initialise Synopsys SSI for standard SPI mode]

- [Issue XIP exit sequence, in case flash is still in an XIP mode and has not been power-cycled]

- [Copy 256 bytes from SPI to internal SRAM (SRAM5) and check for valid CRC32 checksum]

- [If checksum passes, assume what we have loaded is a valid flash second stage]

- [Start executing the loaded code from SRAM (SRAM5)]

- [If no valid image found in SPI after 0.5 seconds of attempting to boot, drop to USB device boot]

- [USB device boot: appear as a USB Mass Storage Device]

   - [Can program the SPI flash, or load directly into SRAM and run, by dragging and dropping an image in UF2] format.

   - [Also supports an extended PICOBOOT interface]

## **2.8.1.1. Watchdog Boot**

Watchdog boot allows users to install their own boot handler, and divert control away from the main boot sequence on non-POR/BOR resets. It also simplifies running code over the JTAG test interface. It recognises the following values written to the watchdog’s upper scratch registers:

- [Scratch 4: magic number ][0xb007c0d3]

- [Scratch 5: Entry point XORed with magic ][-0xb007c0d3][ (][0x4ff83f2d][)]

- [Scratch 6: Stack pointer]

- [Scratch 7: Entry point]

If either of the magic numbers mismatch, watchdog boot does not take place. If the numbers match, the Bootrom zeroes scratch 4 before transferring control, so that the behaviour does not persist over subsequent reboots.

## **2.8.1.2. Flash Boot Sequence**

One of the main challenges of a warm flash boot is forcing the external flash from XIP mode to a mode where it will accept standard SPI commands. There is no standard method to discontinue XIP on an unknown flash. The Bootrom provides a best-effort sequence with broad compatibility, which is as follows:

- CSn=1, IO[3:0]=4’b0000 (via pull-downs to avoid contention), issue ×32 clocks

- CSn=0, IO[3:0]=4’b1111 (via pull-ups to avoid contention), issue ×32 clocks

- [CSn=1]

- CSn=0, MOSI=1’b1 (driven low-Z, all other IOs Hi-Z), issue ×16 clocks

This is designed to miss the XIP continuation codes on Cypress, Micron and Winbond parts. If the device is already in SPI mode, it interprets this sequence as two FFh NOP instructions, which should be ignored.

As this is best effort only, there may be some devices which obstinately remain in XIP mode. There are then two options:

- [Use a less efficient XIP mode where each transfer has an SPI instruction prefix, so the flash device remains] communicative in SPI mode.

- [Boot code installs a compatible XIP exit sequence in SRAM, and configures the watchdog such that a warm boot] will jump straight into this sequence, foregoing our canned sequence.

After issuing the XIP exit sequence, the Bootrom attempts to read in the second stage from flash using standard 03h serial read commands, which are near-universally supported. Since the Bootrom is immutable, it aims for compatibility

2.8. Bootrom

**130**

RP2040 Datasheet

rather than performance.

## **2.8.1.3. Flash Second Stage**

The flash second stage must configure the SSI and the external flash for the best possible execute-in-place performance. This includes interface width, SCK frequency, SPI instruction prefix and an XIP continuation code for address-data only modes. Generally some operation can be performed on the external flash so that it does not require an instruction prefix on each access, and will simply respond to addresses with data.

Until the SSI is correctly configured for the attached flash device, it is not possible to access flash via the XIP address window. Additionally, the Synopsys SSI can not be reconfigured at all without first disabling it. Therefore the second stage must be copied from flash to SRAM by the bootrom, and executed in SRAM.

Alternatively, the second stage can simply shadow an image from external flash into SRAM, and not configure executein-place.

This is the **only** job of the second stage. All other chip setup (e.g. PLLs, Voltage Regulator) can be performed by platform initialisation code executed over the XIP interface, once the second stage has run.

## **2.8.1.3.1. Checksum**

The last four bytes of the image loaded from flash (which we hope is a valid flash second stage) are a CRC32 checksum of the first 252 bytes. The parameters of the checksum are:

- [Polynomial: ][0x04c11db7]

- [Input reflection: no]

- [Output reflection: no]

- [Initial value: ][0xffffffff]

- [Final XOR: ][0x00000000]

- [Checksum value appears as little-endian integer at end of image]

The Bootrom makes 128 attempts of approximately 4ms each for a total of approximately 0.5 seconds before giving up and dropping into USB code to load and checksum the second stage with varying SPI parameters. If it sees a checksum pass it will immediately jump into the 252-byte payload which contains the flash second stage.

## **2.8.2. Launching Code On Processor Core 1**

As described in the introduction to Section 2.8.1, after reset, processor core 1 "sleeps (WFE with SCR.SLEEPDEEP enabled) and remains asleep until woken by user code, via the mailbox".

If you are using the SDK then you can simply use the multicore_launch_core1 function to launch code on processor core 1. However this section describes the procedure to launch code on processor core 1 yourself.

The procedure to start running on processor core 1 involves both cores moving in lockstep through a state machine coordinated by passing messages over the inter-processor FIFOs. This state machine is designed to be robust enough to cope with a recently reset processor core 1 which may be anywhere in its boot code, up to and including going to sleep. As result, the procedure may be performed at any point after processor core 1 has been reset (either by system reset, or explicitly resetting just processor core 1).

The following C code is the simplest way to describe the procedure:

_// values to be sent in order over the FIFO from core 0 to core 1 // // vector_table is value for VTOR register_

2.8. Bootrom

**131**

RP2040 Datasheet

_// sp is initial stack pointer (SP) // entry is the initial program counter (PC) (don't forget to set the thumb bit!)_ const uint32_t cmd_sequence[] = 0, 0, 1, (uintptr_t) vector_table, (uintptr_t) sp, (uintptr_t) entry}; uint seq = 0; do { uint cmd = cmd_sequence[seq]; _// always drain the READ FIFO (from core 1) before sending a 0_ if (!cmd) { _// discard data from read FIFO until empty_ multicore_fifo_drain(); _// execute a SEV as core 1 may be waiting for FIFO space_ __sev(); _// write 32 bit value to write FIFO_ multicore_fifo_push_blocking(cmd); _// read 32 bit value from read FIFO once available_ uint32_t response = multicore_fifo_pop_blocking(); _// move to next state on correct response (echo-d value) otherwise start over_ seq = cmd == response ? seq + 1 : 0; while (seq < count_of(cmd_sequence));

## **2.8.3. Bootrom Contents**

Some of the bootrom is dedicated to the implementation of the boot sequence and USB boot interfaces. There is also code in the bootrom useful to user programs. Table 163 shows the fixed memory layout of the first handful of words in the Bootrom which are instrumental in locating other content within the bootrom.

_Table 163. Bootrom contents at fixed (well known) addresses_

|**Address**|**Contents**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00000000|32-bit pointer|Initial boot stack pointer|
|0x00000004|32-bit pointer|Pointer to boot reset handler function|
|0x00000008|32-bit pointer|Pointer to boot NMI handler function|
|0x0000000c|32-bit pointer|Pointer to boot Hard fault handler function|
|0x00000010|'M','u',0x01|Magic|
|0x00000013|byte|Bootrom version|
|0x00000014|16-bit pointer|Pointer to a public function lookup table (rom_func_table)|
|0x00000016|16-bit pointer|Pointer to a public data lookup table (rom_data_table)|
|0x00000018|16-bit pointer|Pointer to a helper function (rom_table_lookup())|



## **2.8.3.1. Bootrom Functions**

The Bootrom contains a number of public functions that provide useful RP2040 functionality that might be needed in the absence of any other code on the device, as well as highly optimized versions of certain key functionality that would otherwise have to take up space in most user binaries.

These functions are normally made available to the user by the SDK, however a lower level method is provided to locate them (their locations may change with each Bootrom release) and call them directly.

Assuming the three bytes starting at address 0x00000010 are ('M', 'u', 0x01) then the three halfwords starting at offset 0x00000014 are valid.

2.8. Bootrom

**132**

RP2040 Datasheet

These three values can be used to dynamically locate other functions or data within the Bootrom. The version byte at offset 0x00000013 is informational and should not be used to infer the exact location of any functions.

The following code from the SDK shows how the three 16-bit pointers are used to lookup other functions or data.

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/pico_bootrom/bootrom.c Lines 12 - 19_

12 void *rom_func_lookup(uint32_t code) { 13     return rom_func_lookup_inline(code); 14 } 15 16 void *rom_data_lookup(uint32_t code) { 17     return rom_data_lookup_inline(code); 18 }

The code parameter correspond to the _CODE_ values in the tables below, and is calculated as follows:

uint32_t rom_table_code(char c1, char c2) { return (c2 << 8) | c1; }

## **2.8.3.1.1. Fast Bit Counting / Manipulation Functions**

These are optimized versions of common bit counting / manipulation functions.

In general you do not need to call these methods directly as the SDK _pico_bit_ops_ library replaces the corresponding standard compiler library functions by default so that the standard functions such as __builtin_popcount or __clzdi2 uses the corresponding Bootrom implementations automatically (see pico_bit_ops for more details).

These functions have changed in speed slightly between version 1 (V1) of the bootrom and version 2 (V2).

_Table 164. Fast Bit Counting / Manipulation Functions._

|**CODE**|**Cycles Avg**<br>**V1**|**Cycles Avg**<br>**V2/V3**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
|'P','3'|18|20|uint32_t _popcount32(uint32_t value)|
||||Return a count of the number of1bits invalue.|
|'R','3'|21|22|uint32_t _reverse32(uint32_t value)|
||||Return the bits ofvaluein the reverse order.|
|'L','3'|13|9.6|uint32_t _clz32(uint32_t value)|
||||Return the number of consecutive high order0bits ofvalue. Ifvalueis zero, returns<br>32.|
|'T','3'|12|11|uint32_t _ctz32(uint32_t value)|
||||Return the number of consecutive low order0bits ofvalue. Ifvalueis zero, returns<br>32.|



## **2.8.3.1.2. Fast Bulk Memory Fill / Copy Functions**

These are highly optimized bulk memory fill and copy functions commonly provided by most language runtimes.

In general you do not need to call these methods directly as the SDK _pico_mem_ops_ library replaces the corresponding standard ARM EABI functions by default so that the standard C library functions e.g. memcpy or memset use the Bootrom implementations automatically (see pico_mem_ops for more details).

2.8. Bootrom

**133**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 165. Optimized_<br>_Bulk Memory Fill /_<br>_Copy Functions_|**CODE**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||'M','S'|uint8_t *_memset(uint8_t *ptr, uint8_t c, uint32_t n)|
|||Setsnbytes start atptrto the valuecand returnsptr.|
||'S','4'|uint32_t *_memset4(uint32_t *ptr, uint8_t c, uint32_t n)|
|||Setsnbytes start atptrto the valuecand returnsptr. Note this is a slightly more efficient variant of<br>_memsetthat may only be used ifptris word aligned.|
||'M','C'|uint8_t *_memcpy(uint8_t *dest, uint8_t *src, uint32_t n)|
|||Copiesnbytes starting atsrctodestand returnsdest. The results are undefined if the regions overlap.|
||'C','4'|uint8_t *_memcpy44(uint32_t *dest, uint32_t *src, uint32_t n)|
|||Copiesnbytes starting atsrctodestand returnsdest. The results are undefined if the regions overlap.<br>Note this is a slightly more efficient variant of_memcpythat may only be used ifdestandsrcare word<br>aligned.|



## **2.8.3.1.3. Flash Access Functions**

These are low level flash helper functions.

|_Table 166. Flash_<br>_Access Functions_|**CODE**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||'I','F'|void _connect_internal_flash(void)|
|||Restore all QSPI pad controls to their default state, and connect the SSI to the QSPI pads|
||'E','X'|void _flash_exit_xip(void)|
|||First set up the SSI for serial-mode operations, then issue the fixed XIP exit sequence described in<br>Section 2.8.1.2. Note that the bootrom code uses the IO forcing logic to drive the CS pin, which must be<br>cleared before returning the SSI to XIP mode (e.g. by a call to _flash_flush_cache). This function<br>configures the SSI with a fixed SCK clock divisor of /6.|
||'R','E'|void _flash_range_erase(uint32_t addr, size_t count, uint32_t block_size, uint8_t block_cmd)|
|||Erase acountbytes, starting ataddr(offset from start of flash). Optionally, pass a block erase command<br>e.g.D8h block erase, and the size of the block erased by this command — this function will use the larger<br>block erase where possible, for much higher erase speed.addrmust be aligned to a 4096-byte sector, and<br>countmust be a multiple of 4096 bytes.|
||'R','P'|void flash_range_program(uint32_t addr, const uint8_t *data, size_t count)|
|||Programdatato a range of flash addresses starting ataddr(offset from the start of flash) andcountbytes<br>in size.addrmust be aligned to a 256-byte boundary, andcountmust be a multiple of 256.|
||'F','C'|void _flash_flush_cache(void)|
|||Flush and enable the XIP cache. Also clears the IO forcing on QSPI CSn, so that the SSI can drive the<br>flash chip select as normal.|
||'C','X'|void _flash_enter_cmd_xip(void)|
|||Configure the SSI to generate a standard03hserial read command, with 24 address bits, upon each**XIP**<br>access. This is a very slow XIP configuration, but is very widely supported. The debugger calls this<br>function after performing a flash erase/programming operation, so that the freshly-programmed code<br>and data is visible to the debug host, without having to know exactly what kind of flash device is<br>connected.|



A typical call sequence for erasing a flash sector from user code would be:

2.8. Bootrom

**134**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [_connect_internal_flash]

- [_flash_exit_xip]

- [_flash_range_erase(addr, 1 << 12, 1 << 16, 0xd8)]

- [_flash_flush_cache]

- [Either a call to _flash_enter_cmd_xip or call into a flash second stage that was previously copied out into SRAM]

Note that, in between the first and last calls in this sequence, the SSI is **not** in a state where it can handle XIP accesses, so the code that calls the intervening functions must be located in SRAM. The SDK hardware_flash library hides these details.

## **2.8.3.1.4. Debugging Support Functions**

These two methods simplify the task of calling code on the device and then returning control to the debugger.

_Table 167. Debugging Support Functions_

|**CODE**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|'D','T'|_debug_trampoline|
||Simple debugger trampoline for break-on-return.<br>This methods helps the debugger call ROM routines without setting hardware breakpoints. The function<br>address is passed inr7and args are passed throughr0…r3as per ABI.<br>This method does not return but executes aBKPT #0at the end.|
|'D','E'|_debug_trampoline_end|
||This is the address of the finalBKPT #0instruction ofdebug_trampoline. This can be compared with the<br>program counter to detect completion of thedebug_trampolinecall.|



## **2.8.3.1.5. Miscellaneous Functions**

These remaining functions don’t fit in other categories and are exposed in the SDK via the _pico_bootrom_ library (see pico_bootrom).

|_Table 168._<br>_Miscellaneous_<br>_Functions_|**CODE**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||'U','B'|void _reset_to_usb_boot(uint32_t gpio_activity_pin_mask, uint32_t disable_interface_mask)|
|||Resets the RP2040 and uses the watchdog facility to re-start in BOOTSEL mode:<br>• gpio_activity_pin_maskis provided to enable an "activity light" via GPIO attached LED for the USB<br>Mass Storage Device:<br>◦0No pins are used as per a cold boot.<br>◦Otherwise a single bit set indicating which GPIO pin should be set to output and raised<br>whenever there is mass storage activity from the host.<br>• disable_interface_maskmay be used to control the exposed USB interfaces:<br>◦0To enable both interfaces (as per a cold boot)<br>◦1To disable the USB Mass Storage Interface (seeSection 2.8.4)<br>◦2To disable the USB PICOBOOT Interface (seeSection 2.8.5)|



2.8. Bootrom

**135**

RP2040 Datasheet

|'W','V'|_wait_for_vector|
|---|---|
||This is the method that is entered by core 1 on reset to wait to be launched by core 0. There are few<br>cases where you should call this method (resetting core 1 is much better). This method does not return<br>and should only ever be called on core 1.|
|'E','C'|deprecated|
||Do not use this function which may not be present.|



## **2.8.3.2. Fast Floating Point Library**

The Bootrom contains an optimized single-precision floating point implementation. Additionally V2 onwards also contain an optimized double-precision float point implementation. The function pointers for each precision are kept in a table structure found via the rom_data_lookup table (see Section 2.8.3.3).

## **2.8.3.2.1. Implementation Details**

There is always a trade-off between speed and size. Whilst the overall goal for the floating-point routines is to achieve good performance within a small footprint, the emphasis is more on improved performance for the basic operations (add, subtract, multiply, divide and square root) and more on reduced footprint for the scientific functions (trigonometric functions, logarithms and exponentials).

The IEEE single- and double-precision data formats are used throughout, but in the interests of reducing code size, input denormals are treated as zero, input NaNs are treated as infinities, output denormals are flushed to zero, and output NaNs are rendered as infinities. Only the round-to-nearest, even-on-tie rounding mode is supported. Traps are not supported.

The five basic operations return results that are always correctly rounded.

The scientific functions always return results within 1 ULP (unit in last place) of the exact result. In many cases results are better.

The scientific functions are calculated using internal fixed-point representations so accuracy (as measured in ULP error rather than in absolute terms) is poorer in situations where converting the result back to floating point entails a large normalising shift. This occurs, for example, when calculating the sine of a value near a multiple of pi, the cosine of a value near an odd multiple of pi/2, or the logarithm of a value near 1. Accuracy of the tangent function is also poorer when the result is very large. Although covering these cases is possible, it would add considerably to the code footprint, and there are few types of program where accuracy in these situations is essential.

The sine, cosine and tangent functions also only operate correctly over a limited range: -128 < x < +128 for singleprecision arguments x and -1024 < x < +1024 for double-precision x. This is to avoid the need to (at least in effect) store the value of pi to high precision within the code, and hence saves code space. Accurate range reduction over a wider range of arguments can be done externally to the library if required, but again there are few situations where this would be needed.

##  **NOTE**

The SDK cos/sin functions perform this range reduction, so accept the full range of arguments, though are slower for inputs outside of these ranges.

## **2.8.3.2.2. Functions**

These functions follow the standard ARM EABI for passing floating point values.

You do not need to call these methods directly as the SDK pico_float and pico_double libraries used by default replace the _ARM EABI Float functions_ such that C/C++ level code (or indirectly code in languages such as _MicroPython_ that are implemented in C) use these Bootrom functions automatically for the corresponding floating point operations.

2.8. Bootrom

**136**

RP2040 Datasheet

Some of these functions do not behave exactly the same as some of the corresponding C library functions. For that reason if you are using the SDK it is strongly advised that you simply use the regular math.h functions or those in pico/float.h or pico/double.h and not try to call into the bootrom directly.

Note that double-precision floating point support is not present in version 1 (V1) of the bootrom, but the above mentioned pico_double library in the SDK will take care of pulling in any extra code needed for V1.

##  **NOTE**

For more information on using floating point in the SDK, and real world timings (noting also that some conversion functions are re-implemented in the SDK to be faster) see floating point support.

|_Table 169. Single-_<br>_precision Floating_<br>_Point Function Table._<br>_Timings are average_<br>_time in us over_<br>_random (worst case)_<br>_input. Functions with_<br>_timing of N/A are not_<br>_present in that ROM_<br>_version, and the_<br>_function pointer_<br>_should be considered_<br>_invalid. The functions_<br>_(and table entries)_<br>_from offset 0x54_<br>_onwards are only_<br>_present in the V2_<br>_ROM._|**Offset**|**V1 Cycles**<br>**(Avg)**|**V2/V3**<br>**Cycles**<br>**(Avg)**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||Functions common to all versionsof|||the bootrom|
||0x00|71|71|float _fadd(float a, float b)|
|||||Return a + b|
||0x04|74|74|float _fsub(float a, float b)|
|||||Return a - b|
||0x08|69|58|float _fmul(float a, float b)|
|||||Return a * b|
||0x0c|71|71|float _fdiv(float a, float b)|
|||||Return a / b|
||0x10|N/A|N/A|deprecated|
|||||Do not use this function|
||0x14|N/A|N/A|deprecated|
|||||Do not use this function|
||0x18|63|63|float _fsqrt(float v)|
|||||Return<br>or_-Infinity_if v is negative. (Note V1 returns_+Infinity_in this case)|
||0x1c|37|40|int _float2int(float v)|
|||||Convert a float to a signed integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping the<br>result to lie within the range-0x80000000to0x7FFFFFFF|
||0x20|36|39|int _float2fix(float v, int n)|
|||||Convert a float to a signed fixed point integer representation where_n_specifies the<br>position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation - e.g.<br>_float2fix(0.5f, 16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and clamps<br>the resulting integer to lie within the range-0x80000000to0x7FFFFFFF|
||0x24|38|39|uint _float2uint(float v)|
|||||Convert a float to an unsigned integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping<br>the result to lie within the range0x00000000to0xFFFFFFFF|



2.8. Bootrom

**137**

RP2040 Datasheet

|0x28|38|38|uint _float2ufix(float v, int n)|
|---|---|---|---|
||||Convert a float to an unsigned fixed point integer representation where_n_specifies<br>the position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation, e.g.<br>_float2ufix(0.5f, 16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and clamps<br>the resulting integer to lie within the range0x00000000to0xFFFFFFFF|
|0x2c|55|55|float _int2float(int v)|
||||Convert a signed integer to the nearest float value, rounding to even on tie|
|0x30|53|53|float _fix2float(int32_t v, int n)|
||||Convert a signed fixed point integer representation to the nearest float value,<br>rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed point,<br>so|
|0x34|54|54|float _uint2float(uint32_t v)|
||||Convert an unsigned integer to the nearest float value, rounding to even on tie|
|0x38|52|52|float _ufix2float(uint32_t v, int n)|
||||Convert an unsigned fixed point integer representation to the nearest float value,<br>rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed point,<br>so|
|0x3c|603|587|float _fcos(float angle)|
||||Return the cosine of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -128 to<br>128|
|0x40|593|577|float _fsin(float angle)|
||||Return the sine of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -128 to 128|
|0x44|669|653|float _ftan(float angle)|
||||Return the tangent of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -128 to<br>128|
|0x48|N/A|N/A|deprecated|
||||Do not use this function|
|0x4c|542|524|float _fexp(float v)|
||||Return the exponential value of v, i.e. so|
|0x50|810|789|float _fln( float v)|
||||Return the natural logarithm of v. If<br>return_-Infinity_|
|Functions (and table entries) present in the V2/V3 bootrom only||||
|0x54|N/A|25|int _fcmp(float a, float b)|
||||Compares two floating point numbers, returning:<br>• 0 if a == b<br>• -1 if a < b<br>• 1 if a > b|
|0x58|N/A|667|float _fatan2(float y, float x)|
||||Computes the arc tangent of y/x using the signs of arguments to determine the<br>correct quadrant|



2.8. Bootrom

**138**

RP2040 Datasheet

|0x5c|N/A|62|float _int642float(int64_t v)|
|---|---|---|---|
||||Convert a signed 64-bit integer to the nearest float value, rounding to even on tie|
|0x60|N/A|60|float _fix642float(int64_t v, int n)|
||||Convert a signed fixed point 64-bit integer representation to the nearest float<br>value, rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed<br>point, so|
|0x64|N/A|58|float _uint642float(uint64_t v)|
||||Convert an unsigned 64-bit integer to the nearest float value, rounding to even on<br>tie|
|0x68|N/A|57|float _ufix642float(uint64_t v, int n)|
||||Convert an unsigned fixed point 64-bit integer representation to the nearest float<br>value, rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed<br>point, so|
|0x6c|N/A|54|_float2int64|
||||Convert a float to a signed 64-bit integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping<br>the result to lie within the range-0x8000000000000000to0x7FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x70|N/A|53|_float2fix64|
||||Convert a float to a signed fixed point 64-bit integer representation where_n_<br>specifies the position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation<br>- e.g._float2fix(0.5f, 16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and<br>clamps the resulting integer to lie within the range-0x8000000000000000to<br>0x7FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x74|N/A|42|_float2uint64|
||||Convert a float to an unsigned 64-bit integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and<br>clamping the result to lie within the range0x0000000000000000to0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x78|N/A|41|_float2ufix64|
||||Convert a float to an unsigned fixed point 64-bit integer representation where_n_<br>specifies the position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation,<br>e.g._float2ufix(0.5f, 16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and<br>clamps the resulting integer to lie within the range0x0000000000000000to<br>0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x7c|N/A|15|double _float2double(float v)|
||||Converts a float to a double|
|Function present in the V3 bootrom only||||
|0x48<br>(uses||577(V3<br>only)|float_(,float)__fsincos(float angle)|
|previously<br>deprecated<br>slot)|||Calculates the sine and cosine of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the<br>range -128 to 128. The sine value is returned in register_r0_(and is thus the official<br>function return value), the cosine value is returned in register_r1_. This method is<br>considerably faster than calling_fsinand_fcosseparately.|



Note that the V2/V3 bootroms contains an equivalent table of functions for double-precision floating point operations. The offsets are the same, however where there was now float there is double (and vice versa for the float<>double conversion)

2.8. Bootrom

**139**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 170. Double-_<br>_precision Floating_<br>_Point Function Table._<br>_Timings are average_<br>_time in us over_<br>_random (worst case)_<br>_input. Functions with_<br>_timing of N/A are not_<br>_present in that ROM_<br>_version, and the_<br>_function pointer_<br>_should be considered_<br>_invalid. The functions_<br>_(and table entries)_<br>_from offset 0x54_<br>_onwards are only_<br>_present in the V2 and_<br>_V3 ROMs._|**Offset**|**Cycles**<br>**(Avg)***|**Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x00|91|double _dadd(double a, double b)|
||||Return a + b|
||0x04|95|double _dsub(double a, double b)|
||||Return a - b|
||0x08|155|double _dmul(double a, double b)|
||||Return a * b|
||0x0c|183|double _ddiv(double a, double b)|
||||Return a / b|
||0x10|N/A|deprecated|
||||Do not use this function|
||0x14|N/A|deprecated|
||||Do not use this function|
||0x18|169|double _dsqrt(double v)|
||||Return<br>or_-Infinity_if v is negative.|
||0x1c|75|int _double2int(double v)|
||||Convert a double to a signed integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping the result to<br>lie within the range-0x80000000to0x7FFFFFFF|
||0x20|74|int _double2fix(double v, int n)|
||||Convert a double to a signed fixed point integer representation where_n_specifies the<br>position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation - e.g._double2fix(0.5f,<br>16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and clamps the resulting integer to lie<br>within the range-0x80000000to0x7FFFFFFF|
||0x24|63|uint _double2uint(double v)|
||||Convert a double to an unsigned integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping the result<br>to lie within the range0x00000000to0xFFFFFFFF|
||0x28|62|uint _double2ufix(double v, int n)|
||||Convert a double to an unsigned fixed point integer representation where_n_specifies the<br>position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation, e.g._double2ufix(0.5f,<br>16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and clamps the resulting integer to lie<br>within the range0x00000000to0xFFFFFFFF|
||0x2c|69|double _int2double(int v)|
||||Convert a signed integer to the nearest double value, rounding to even on tie|
||0x30|68|double _fix2double(int32_t v, int n)|
||||Convert a signed fixed point integer representation to the nearest double value, rounding to<br>even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed point, so|
||0x34|64|double _uint2double(uint32_t v)|
||||Convert an unsigned integer to the nearest double value, rounding to even on tie|



2.8. Bootrom

**140**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Cycles**<br>**(Avg)***|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
|0x38|62|double _ufix2double(uint32_t v, int n)|
|||Convert an unsigned fixed point integer representation to the nearest double value,<br>rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed point, so|
|0x3c|1617|double _dcos(double angle)|
|||Return the cosine of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -1024 to 1024|
|0x40|1618|double _dsin(double angle)|
|||Return the sine of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -1024 to 1024|
|0x44|1891|double _dtan(double angle)|
|||Return the tangent of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -1024 to 1024|
|0x48|N/A|deprecated|
|||Do not use this function|
|0x4c|804|double _dexp(double v)|
|||Return the exponential value of v, i.e. so|
|0x50|428|double _dln( double v)|
|||Return the natural logarithm of v. If<br>return_-Infinity_|
|0x54|39|int _dcmp(double a, double b)|
|||Compares two floating point numbers, returning:<br>• 0 if a == b<br>• -1 if a < b<br>• 1 if a > b|
|0x58|2168|double _datan2(double y, double x)|
|||Computes the arc tangent of y/x using the signs of arguments to determine the correct<br>quadrant|
|0x5c|55|double _int642double(int64_t v)|
|||Convert a signed 64-bit integer to the nearest double value, rounding to even on tie|
|0x60|56|double _dix642double(int64_t v, int n)|
|||Convert a signed fixed point 64-bit integer representation to the nearest double value,<br>rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed point, so|
|0x64|50|double _uint642double(uint64_t v)|
|||Convert an unsigned 64-bit integer to the nearest double value, rounding to even on tie|
|0x68|49|double _ufix642double(uint64_t v, int n)|
|||Convert an unsigned fixed point 64-bit integer representation to the nearest double value,<br>rounding to even on tie._n_specifies the position of the binary point in fixed point, so|
|0x6c|64|_double2int64|
|||Convert a double to a signed 64-bit integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping the<br>result to lie within the range-0x8000000000000000to0x7FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|



2.8. Bootrom

**141**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Cycles**<br>**(Avg)***|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
|0x70|63|_double2fix64|
|||Convert a double to a signed fixed point 64-bit integer representation where_n_specifies the<br>position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation - e.g._double2fix(0.5f,<br>16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and clamps the resulting integer to lie<br>within the range-0x8000000000000000to0x7FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x74|53|_double2uint64|
|||Convert a double to an unsigned 64-bit integer, rounding towards_-Infinity_, and clamping the<br>result to lie within the range0x0000000000000000to0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x78|52|_double2ufix64|
|||Convert a double to an unsigned fixed point 64-bit integer representation where_n_specifies<br>the position of the binary point in the resulting fixed point representation, e.g.<br>_double2ufix(0.5f, 16) == 0x8000. This method rounds towards_-Infinity_, and clamps the<br>resulting integer to lie within the range0x0000000000000000to0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF|
|0x7c|23|float _double2float(double v)|
|||Converts a double to a float|
|Function present in the V3 bootrom only|||
|0x48<br>(uses|1718<br>(V3 only)|double(,double)_sincos(double angle)|
|previously<br>deprecated<br>slot)||Calculates the sine and cosine of_angle_._angle_is in radians, and must be in the range -1024<br>to 1024. The sine value is returned in registers_r0_/_r1_(and is thus the official return value),<br>the cosine value is returned in registers_r2_/_r3_. This method is considerably faster than<br>calling_sinand_cosseparately.|



## **2.8.3.3. Bootrom Data**

The Bootrom data table (rom_data_table) contains the following pointers.

|_Table 171. Bootrom_<br>_data pointers_|**CODE**|**Value (16-bit pointer) Description**|
|---|---|---|
||'C','R'|const char *copyright_string|
|||The Raspberry Pi Trading Ltd copyright string.|
||'G','R'|const uint32_t *git_revision|
|||The 8 most significant hex digits of the Bootrom git revision.|
||'F','S'|fplib_start|
|||The start address of the floating point library code and data. This andfplib_endalong with the individual<br>function pointers insoft_float_tablecan be used to copy the floating point implementation into RAM if<br>desired.|
||'S','F'|soft_float_table|
|||SeeTable 169for the contents of this table.|
||'F','E'|fplib_end|
|||The end address of the floating point library code and data.|



2.8. Bootrom

**142**

RP2040 Datasheet

|'S','D'|soft_double_table|
|---|---|
||This entry is only present in the V2 bootrom. SeeTable 170for the contents of this table.|
|'P','8'|_deprecated_. This entry is not present in the V2 bootrom; do not use it.|
|'R','8'|_deprecated_. This entry is not present in the V2 bootrom; do not use it.|
|'L','8'|_deprecated_. This entry is not present in the V2 bootrom; do not use it.|
|'T','8'|_deprecated_. This entry is not present in the V2 bootrom; do not use it.|



## **2.8.4. USB Mass Storage Interface**

The Bootrom provides a standard USB bootloader that makes a writeable drive available for copying code to the RP2040 using _UF2_ files (see Section 2.8.4.2).

A _UF2_ file copied to the drive is downloaded and written to Flash or RAM, and the device is automatically rebooted, making it trivial to download and run code on the RP2040 using only a USB connection.

## **2.8.4.1. The RPI-RP2 Drive**

The RP2040 appears as a standard 128MB flash drive named _RPI-RP2_ formatted as a single partition with FAT16. There are only ever two actual files visible on the drive specified.

- [INFO_UF2.TXT][ - contains a string description of the UF2 bootloader and version.]

- [INDEX.HTM][ - redirects to information about the RP2040 device.]

Any type of files may be written to the USB drive from the host, however in general these are not stored, and only _appear_ to be so because of caching on the host side.

When a _UF2_ file is written to the device however, the special contents are recognized and data is written to specified locations in RAM or Flash. On the completed download of an entire valid _UF2_ file, the RP2040 automatically reboots to run the newly downloaded code.

##  **NOTE**

The INDEX.HTM file is currently redirected to https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/microcontrollers/

## **2.8.4.2. UF2 Format Details**

##  **TIP**

To generate _UF2_ files, use the _UF2_ convert functionality in picotool.

##  **NOTE**

Invalid _UF2_ files may not write at all or only write partially to RP2040 before failing. Not all operating systems notify you of disk write errors after a failed write. You can use picotool to verify that a _UF2_ file wrote correctly to RP2040.

- [All data destined for the device must be in a ][UF2][ block with ][familyID][ present and set to ][0xe48bff56][, and a ][payload_size] of 256.

- [All data must be destined for (and fit entirely within) the following memory ranges (depending on the type of binary] being downloaded which is determined by the address of the first _UF2_ block encountered):

2.8. Bootrom

**143**

RP2040 Datasheet

## a. A regular flash binary

   - [0x10000000][-][0x11000000] _[Flash:]_[ All blocks must be targeted at 256 byte alignments. Writes beyond the end of] physical flash will wrap back to the beginning of flash.

- b. A _RAM only_ binary

   - [0x20000000][-][0x20042000] _[Main RAM:]_[ Blocks can be positioned with byte alignment.]

   - [0x15000000][-][0x15004000] _[Flash Cache:]_[ (since flash is not being targeted, the Flash Cache is available for use] as RAM with same properties as _Main RAM_ ).

##  **NOTE**

Traditionally _UF2_ has only been used to write to Flash, but this is more a limitation of using the metadata-free .BIN file as the source to generate the _UF2_ file. RP2040 takes full advantage of the inherent flexibility of _UF2_ to support the full range of binaries in the richer .ELF format produced by the build to be used as the source for the _UF2_ file.

- [The ][numBlocks][ must specify a total size of the binary that fits in the regions specified above]

- [A change of ][numBlocks][ or the binary type (determined by ] _[UF2]_[ block target address) will discard the current transfer] in progress.

- [All data must be in blocks without the ][UF2_FLAG_NOT_MAIN_FLASH][ marking which relates to content to be ignored rather] than Flash vs RAM.

The flash is always erased a 4kB sector at a time, so including data for only a subset of the 256-byte pages within a sector in a flash-binary UF2 will leave the remaining 256-byte pages of the sector erased but undefined. The RP2040 bootrom will accept UF2 binaries with such partially-filled sectors, however due to a bug (RP2040-E14) such binaries may not be written correctly if there is any partially-filled sector other than at the end. Most flash binaries are 4kB aligned and contiguous, and therefore it _is_ usually only the last sector that is partially-filled. If you need to write nonaligned or non-contiguous UF2s to flash, then you should make sure to include a full 4kB worth of data for every sector in flash that will be written other than the last. This is handled for you automatically by the elf2uf2 tool in the SDK version 1.3.1 onwards, which explicitly adds zero-filled pages to the appropriate _partially-filled_ sectors.

A binary is considered "downloaded" when each of the numBlocks blocks has been seen at least once in the course of a single valid transfer. The data for a block is only written the first time in case of the host resending duplicate blocks.

After downloading a regular flash binary, a reset is performed after which the flash binary second stage (at address 0x10000000 - the start of flash) will be entered (if valid) via the bootrom.

A downloaded _RAM only_ binary is entered by watchdog reset into the start of the binary, which is calculated as the lowest address of a downloaded block (with Main RAM considered lower than Flash Cache if both are present).

Finally it is possible for host software to temporarily disable _UF2_ writes via the PICOBOOT interface to prevent interference with operations being performed via that interface (see below), in which case any _UF2_ file write in progress will be aborted.

## **2.8.5. USB PICOBOOT Interface**

The PICOBOOT interface is a low level USB protocol for interacting with the RP2040 while it is in BOOTSEL mode. This interface may be used concurrently with the USB Mass Storage Interface.

It provides for flexible reading from and writing to RAM or Flash, rebooting, executing code on the device and a handful of other management functions.

Constants and structures related to the interface can be found in the SDK header https://github.com/raspberrypi/picosdk/blob/master/src/common/boot_picoboot_headers/include/boot/picoboot.h

2.8. Bootrom

**144**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.8.5.1. Identifying The Device**

A RP2040 device is recognized by the _Vendor ID_ and _Product ID_ in its device descriptor (shown in Table 172).

_Table 172. RP2040 Boot Device Descriptor_

|**Field**|**Value**|
|---|---|
|bLength|18|
|bDescriptorType|1|
|bcdUSB|1.10|
|bDeviceClass|0|
|bDeviceSubClass|0|
|bDeviceProtocol|0|
|bMaxPacketSize0|64|
|**idVendor**|**0x2e8a**|
|**idProduct**|**0x0003**|
|bcdDevice|1.00|
|iManufacturer|1|
|iProduct|2|
|iSerial|3|
|bNumConfigurations|1|



## **2.8.5.2. Identifying The Interface**

The PICOBOOT interface is recognized by the "Vendor Specific" _Interface Class_ and the zero _Interface Sub Class_ and _Interface Protocol_ (shown in Table 173). Note that you should not rely on the interface number, as that is dependent on whether the device is also exposing the Mass Storage Interface. Note also that the device equally may not be exposing the PICOBOOT interface at all, so you should not assume it is present.

_Table 173. PICOBOOT Interface Descriptor_

|**Field**|**Value**|
|---|---|
|bLength|9|
|bDescriptorType|4|
|bInterfaceNumber|varies|
|bAlternateSetting|0|
|bNumEndpoints|2|
|**bInterfaceClass**|**0xff (vendor specific)**|
|**bInterfaceSubClass**|**0**|
|**bInterfaceProtocol**|**0**|
|iInterface|0|



## **2.8.5.3. Identifying The Endpoints**

The PICOBOOT interface provides a single _BULK OUT_ and a single _BULK IN_ endpoint. These can be identified by their direction and type. You should not rely on endpoint numbers.

2.8. Bootrom

**145**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.8.5.4. PICOBOOT Commands**

The two bulk endpoints are used for sending commands and retrieved successful command results. All commands are exactly 32 bytes (see Table 174) and sent to the _BULK OUT_ endpoint.

_Table 174. PICOBOOT Command Definition_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|dMagic|The value0x431fd10b|
|0x04|dToken|A user provided token to identify this request by|
|0x08|bCmdId|The ID of the command. Note that the top bit indicates data transfer direction<br>(0x80 = IN)|
|0x09|bCmdSize|Number of bytes of valid data in the_args_field|
|0x0a|reserved|0x0000|
|0x0c|dTransferLength|The number of bytes the host expects to send or receive over the bulk channel|
|0x10|args|16 bytes of command specific data padded with zeros|



If a command sent is invalid or not recognized, the bulk endpoints will be stalled. Further information will be available via the _GET_COMMAND_STATUS_ request (see Section 2.8.5.5.2).

Following the initial 32 byte packet, if _dTranferLength_ is non-zero, then that many bytes are transferred over the bulk pipe and the command is completed with an empty packet in the opposite direction. If _dTransferLength_ is zero then command success is indicated by an empty IN packet.

The following commands are supported (note common fields _dMagic_ , _dToken_ , _reserved_ are omitted for clarity)

## **2.8.5.4.1. EXCLUSIVE_ACCESS (0x01)**

Claim or release exclusive access for writing to the RP2040 over USB (versus the Mass Storage Interface)

|_Table 175. PICOBOOT_<br>_Exclusive access_<br>_command structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x01 (EXCLUSIVE_ACCESS)||
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x01||
||0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000||
||0x10|bExclusive|NOT_EXCLUSIVE (0)|No restriction on USB Mass Storage operation|
||||EXCLUSIVE (1)|Disable USB Mass Storage writes (the host should<br>see them as write protect failures, but in any case<br>any active_UF2_download will be aborted)|
||||EXCLUSIVE_AND_EJECT<br>(2)|Lock the USB Mass Storage Interface out by<br>marking the drive media as not present (ejecting<br>the drive)|



## **2.8.5.4.2. REBOOT (0x02)**

Reboots the RP2040 out of BOOTSEL mode. Note that BOOTSEL mode might be re-entered if rebooting to flash and no valid second stage bootloader is found.

|_Table 176. PICOBOOT_<br>_Reboot access_<br>_command structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x02 (REBOOT)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x0c|



2.8. Bootrom

**146**

RP2040 Datasheet

|0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000|0x00000000|
|---|---|---|---|
|0x10|dPC|The address to start executing from. Valid values are:||
|||0x00000000|Reboot via the standard<br>Flash boot mechanism|
|||RAM address|Reboot via watchdog and<br>start executing at the<br>specified address in RAM|
|0x14|dSP|Initial stack pointer post reboot (only used if booting into<br>RAM)||
|0x18|dDelayMS|Number of milliseconds to delay prior to reboot||



## **2.8.5.4.3. FLASH_ERASE (0x03)**

Erases a contiguous range of flash sectors.

|_Table 177. PICOBOOT_<br>_Flash erase command_<br>_structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x03 (FLASH_ERASE)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x08|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000|
||0x10|dAddr|The address in flash to erase, starting at this location. This must be sector<br>(4kB) aligned|
||0x14|dSize|The number of bytes to erase. This must an exact multiple number of sectors<br>(4kB)|



## **2.8.5.4.4. READ (0x84)**

Read a contiguous memory (Flash or RAM or ROM) range from the RP2040

|_Table 178. PICOBOOT_<br>_Read memory_<br>_command (Flash,_<br>_RAM, ROM) structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x84 (READ)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x08|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|Must be the same as dSize|
||0x10|dAddr|The address to read from. May be in Flash or RAM or ROM|
||0x14|dSize|The number of bytes to read|



## **2.8.5.4.5. WRITE (0x05)**

Writes a contiguous memory range of memory (Flash or RAM) on the RP2040.

|_Table 179. PICOBOOT_<br>_Write memory_<br>_command (Flash,_<br>_RAM) structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x05 (WRITE)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x08|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|Must be the same as dSize|



2.8. Bootrom

**147**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|
|0x10|dAddr|The address to write from. May be in Flash or RAM, however must be page<br>(256 byte) aligned if in Flash. Note the flash must be erased first or the results<br>are undefined.|
|0x14|dSize|The number of bytes to write. If writing to flash and the size is not an exact<br>multiple of pages (256 bytes) then the last page is zero-filled to the end.|



## **2.8.5.4.6. EXIT_XIP (0x06)**

Exit Flash XIP mode. This first initialises the SSI for serial transfers, and then issues the XIP exit sequence given in Section 2.8.1.2, to attempt to make the flash responsive to standard serial SPI commands. The SSI is configured with a fixed clock divisor of /6, so the USB bootloader will drive SCLK at 8MHz.

|_Table 180. PICOBOOT_<br>_Exit Execute in place_<br>_(XIP) command_<br>_structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x06 (EXIT_XIP)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x00|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000|



## **2.8.5.4.7. ENTER_XIP (0x07)**

Enter Flash XIP mode. This configures the SSI to issue a standard 03h serial read command, with 24 address clocks and 32 data clocks, for every XIP access. This is a slow but very widely supported way to read flash. The intent of this function is to make flash easily accessible (i.e. just access addresses in the 0x10…… segment) without having to know the details of exactly what kind of flash is connected. This mode is suitable for executing code from flash, but is much slower than e.g. QSPI XIP access.

|_Table 181. PICOBOOT_<br>_Enter Execute in place_<br>_(XIP) command_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x07 (ENTER_XIP)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x00|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000|



## **2.8.5.4.8. EXEC (0x08)**

Executes a function on the device. This function takes no arguments and returns no results, so it must communicate via RAM. Execution of this method will block any other commands as well as Mass Storage Interface _UF2_ writes, so should only be used in exclusive mode and with extreme care (and it should save and restore registers as per the ARM EABI). This method is called from a regular (non-IRQ) context, and has a very limited stack, so the function should use its own.

|_Table 182. PICOBOOT_<br>_Execute function on_<br>_device command_<br>_structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x08 (EXEC)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x04|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000|
||0x10|dAddr|Function address to execute at (a thumb bit will be added for you since you<br>will have forgotten).|



2.8. Bootrom

**148**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.8.5.4.9. VECTORIZE_FLASH (0x09)**

Requests that the vector table of flash access functions used internally by the Mass Storage and PICOBOOT interfaces be copied into RAM, such that the method implementations can be replaced with custom versions (For example, if the board uses flash that does not support standard commands)

|_Table 183. PICOBOOT_<br>_Vectorise flash_<br>_command structure_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Value / Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x08|bCmdId|0x09 (VECTORIZE_FLASH)|
||0x09|bCmdSize|0x04|
||0x0c|dTransferLength|0x00000000|
||0x10|dAddr|Pointer to where to place vector table in RAM|



_Flash function vector table_

struct { uint32_t size; // 28 uint32_t (*do_flash_enter_cmd_xip)(); uint32_t (*do_flash_exit_xip)(); uint32_t (*do_flash_erase_sector)(); uint32_t (*do_flash_erase_range)(uint32_t addr, uint32_t size); uint32_t (*do_flash_page_program)(uint32_t addr, uint8_t *data); uint32_t (*do_flash_page_read)(uint32_t addr, uint8_t *data); };

These methods have the same signature and arguments as the corresponding flash access functions in the bootrom (see Section 2.8.3.1.3).

Note that the host must subsequently update the RAM copy of this table via an EXEC command running on the RP2040 as any write to RAM from the host via a PICOBOOT WRITE that overlaps this (now active in RAM) vector table will cause a reset to the use of the default ROM Flash function vector table.

## **2.8.5.5. Control Requests**

The following requests are sent to the interface via the default control pipe.

## **2.8.5.5.1. INTERFACE_RESET (0x41)**

The host sends this control request to reset the PICOBOOT interface. This command:

- [Clears the HALT condition (if set) on each of the bulk endpoints]

- [Aborts any in-process PICOBOOT or Mass Storage transfer and any flash write (this method is the only way to kill a] stuck flash transfer).

- [Clears the previous command result]

- [Removes EXCLUSIVE_ACCESS and remounts the Mass Storage drive if it was ejected due to exclusivity.]

_Table 184. PICOBOOT Reset PICOBOOT interface control_

|**bmRequestType**|**bRequest**|**wValue**|**wIndex**|**wLength**|**Data**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|01000001b|01000001b|0000h|Interface|0000h|none|



This command responds with an empty packet on success.

2.8. Bootrom

**149**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.8.5.5.2. GET_COMMAND_STATUS (0x42)**

Retrieve the status of the last command (which may be a command still in progress). Successful completion of a PICOBOOT Protocol Command is acknowledged over the bulk pipe, however if the operation is still in progress or has failed (stalling the bulk pipe), then this method can be used to determine the operation’s status.

|_Table 185. PICOBOOT_<br>_Get last command_<br>_status control_|**bmRequestType**|**bRequest**|**wValue**|**wIndex**|**wLength**|**Data**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||11000001b|01000010b|0000h|Interface|0000h|none|



The command responds with the following 16 byte response

|_Table 186. PICOBOOT_<br>_Get last command_<br>_status control_<br>_response_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Description**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||0x00|dToken|The user token specified with the command||
||0x04|dStatusCode|OK (0)|The command completed successfully (or is in still in<br>progress)|
||||UNKNOWN_CMD (1)|The ID of the command was not recognized|
||||INVALID_CMD_LENGTH (2)|The length of the command request was incorrect|
||||INVALID_TRANSFER_LENG<br>TH (3)|The data transfer length was incorrect given the<br>command|
||||INVALID_ADDRESS (4)|The address specified was invalid for the command type;<br>i.e. did not match the type Flash/RAM that the command<br>was expecting|
||||BAD_ALIGNMENT (5)|The address specified was not correctly aligned according<br>to the requirements of the command|
||||INTERLEAVED_WRITE (6)|A Mass Storage Interface_UF2_write has interfered with the<br>current operation. The command was abandoned with<br>unknown status. Note this will not happen if you have<br>_exclusive_access.|
||||REBOOTING (7)|The device is in the process of rebooting, so the command<br>has been ignored.|
||||UNKNOWN_ERROR (8)|Some other error occurred.|
||0x08|bCmdId|The ID of the command||
||0x09|bInProgress|1 if the command is still in<br>progress|0 otherwise|
||0x0a|reserved|(6 zero bytes)||
