## **2.9. Power Supplies**

RP2040 requires five separate power supplies. However, in most applications, several of these can be combined and connected to a single power source. In a typical application, only a single 3.3V supply will be required. See Section 2.9.7.1, “Single 3.3V Supply”.

The power supplies and a number of potential power supply schemes are described in the following sections. Detailed power supply parameters are provided in Section 5.6, “Power Supplies”.

2.9. Power Supplies

**150**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.9.1. Digital IO Supply (IOVDD)**

IOVDD supplies the chip’s digital IO, and should be powered at a nominal voltage between 1.8V and 3.3V. The supply voltage sets the external signal level for the digital IO and should be chosen based on the signal level required. See Section 5.5.3, “Pin Specifications” for details. All digital IOs share the same power supply and operate at the same signal level.

IOVDD should be decoupled with a 100nF capacitor close to each of the chip’s IOVDD pins.

##  **CAUTION**

If the digital IO is powered at a nominal 1.8V, the IO input thresholds should be adjusted via the VOLTAGE_SELECT register. By default, the IO input thresholds are valid when the digital IO is powered at a nominal voltage between 2.5V and 3.3V. See Section 2.19, “GPIO” for details. Powering the IO at 1.8V with input thresholds set for a 2.5V to 3.3V supply is a safe operating mode, but will result in input thresholds that do not meet specification. Powering the IO at voltages greater than a nominal 1.8V with input thresholds set for a 1.8V supply may result in damage to the chip.

## **2.9.2. Digital Core Supply (DVDD)**

DVDD supplies the chip’s core digital logic, and should be powered at a nominal 1.1V. A dedicated on-chip voltage regulator is provided to allow DVDD to be generated from the digital IO supply (IOVDD) or another nominally 1.8V to 3.3V supply. The connection between the output pin of the on-chip regulator (VREG_VOUT) and the DVDD supply pins is made off-chip, allowing DVDD to be powered from an off-chip power source if required.

DVDD should be decoupled with a 100nF capacitor close to each of the chip’s DVDD pins.

## **2.9.3. On-Chip Voltage Regulator Input Supply (VREG_VIN)**

VREG_VIN is the input supply for the on-chip voltage regulator. It should be powered at a nominal voltage between 1.8V and 3.3V. To reduce the number of external power supplies, VREG_VIN can use the same power source as the digital IO supply (IOVDD).

A 1μF capacitor should be connected between VREG_VIN and ground close to the chip’s VREG_VIN pin.

##  **CAUTION**

VREG_VIN also powers the chip’s power-on reset and brown-out detection blocks, so it must be powered even if the on-chip voltage regulator is not used.

For more details on the on-chip voltage regulator see Section 2.10, “Core Supply Regulator”.

## **2.9.4. USB PHY Supply (USB_VDD)**

USB_VDD supplies the chip’s USB PHY, and should be powered at a nominal 3.3V. To reduce the number of external power supplies, USB_VDD can use the same power source as the digital IO supply (IOVDD), assuming IOVDD is also powered at 3.3V. If IOVDD is not powered at 3.3V, a separate 3.3V supply will be required for the USB PHY, see Section 2.9.7.3, “1.8V Digital IO with Functional USB and ADC”. In applications where the USB PHY is never used, USB_VDD can be tied to any supply with a nominal voltage between 1.8V and 3.3V. See Section 2.9.7.4, “Single 1.8V Supply” for an example. USB_VDD should not be left unconnected.

USB_VDD should be decoupled with a 100nF capacitor close to the chip’s USB_VDD pin.

2.9. Power Supplies

**151**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.9.5. ADC Supply (ADC_AVDD)**

ADC_AVDD supplies the chip’s Analogue to Digital Converter (ADC). It can be powered at a nominal voltage between 1.8V and 3.3V, but the performance of the ADC will be compromised at voltages below 2.97V. To reduce the number of external power supplies, ADC_AVDD can use from the same power source as the digital IO supply (IOVDD).

##  **NOTE**

It is safe to supply ADC_AVDD at a higher or lower voltage than IOVDD, e.g. to power the ADC at 3.3V, for optimum performance, while supporting 1.8V signal levels on the digital IO. But the voltage on the ADC analogue inputs must not exceed IOVDD, e.g. if IOVDD is powered at 1.8V, the voltage on the ADC inputs should be limited to 1.8V. Voltages greater than IOVDD will result in leakage currents through the ESD protection diodes. See Section 5.5.3, “Pin Specifications” for details.

ADC_AVDD should be decoupled with a 100nF capacitor close to the chip’s ADC_AVDD pin.

## **2.9.6. Power Supply Sequencing**

RP2040’s power supplies may be powered up or down in any order. However, small transient currents may flow in the ADC supply (ADC_AVDD) if it is powered up before, or powered down after, the digital core supply (DVDD). This will not damage the chip, but can be avoided by powering up DVDD before or at the same time as ADC_AVDD, and powering down DVDD after or at the same time as ADC_AVDD. In the most common power supply scheme, where the chip is powered from a single 3.3V supply, DVDD will be powered up shortly after ADC_AVDD due to the startup time of the onchip voltage regulator. This is acceptable behaviour. See Section 2.9.7.1, “Single 3.3V Supply”.

## **2.9.7. Power Supply Schemes**

## **2.9.7.1. Single 3.3V Supply**

In most applications, RP2040 will be powered from a single 3.3V supply, as shown in Figure 16. The digital IO (IOVDD), USB PHY (USB_VDD) and ADC (ADC_AVDD) will be powered directly from the 3.3V supply, and the 1.1V digital core supply (DVDD) will be regulated from the 3.3V supply by the on-chip voltage regulator. Note that the regulator output pin (VREG_VOUT) must be connected to the chip’s DVDD pins off-chip.

For more details on the on-chip voltage regulator see Section 2.10, “Core Supply Regulator”.

2.9. Power Supplies

**152**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 16. powering the chip from a single 3.3V supply (simplified diagram omitting decoupling components)_

**==> picture [297 x 259] intentionally omitted <==**

## **2.9.7.2. External Core Supply**

The digital core (DVDD) can be powered directly from an external 1.1V supply, rather than from the on-chip regulator, as shown in Figure 17. This approach may make sense if a suitable external regulator is available elsewhere in the system, or for low power applications where an efficient switched-mode regulator could be used instead of the less efficient linear on-chip voltage regulator.

If an external core supply is used, the output of on-chip voltage regulator (VREG_VOUT) should be left unconnected. However, power must still be provided to the regulator input (VREG_VIN) to supply the chip’s power-on reset and brownout detection blocks. The on-chip voltage regulator will power-on as soon as VREG_VIN is available, but can be shutdown under software control once the chip is out of reset. See Section 2.10, “Core Supply Regulator” for details.

_Figure 17. using an external core supply_

**==> picture [297 x 260] intentionally omitted <==**

2.9. Power Supplies

**153**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.9.7.3. 1.8V Digital IO with Functional USB and ADC**

Applications with digital IO signal levels less than 3.3V will require a separate 3.3V supply for the USB PHY and ADC, as the USB PHY does not meet specification at voltages below 3.135V and ADC performance is compromised at voltages below 2.97V. Figure 18 shows an example application with the digital IO (IOVDD) powered at 1.8V and a separate 3.3V supply for the USB PHY (USB_VDD) and ADC (ADC_AVDD). In this example, the voltage regulator input (VREG_VIN) is connected to the 1.8V supply, though it could equally have been connected to the 3.3V supply. Connecting it to the 1.8V supply will reduce overall power consumption if the 1.8V supply is generated by an efficient switched-mode regulator.

_Figure 18. supporting 1.8V IO while using USB and the ADC_

**==> picture [297 x 260] intentionally omitted <==**

## **2.9.7.4. Single 1.8V Supply**

If a functional USB PHY and optimum ADC performance are not required, RP2040 can be powered from a single supply of less than 3.3V. Figure 19 shows an example with a single 1.8V supply. In this example, the core supply (DVDD) is regulated from the 1.8V supply by the on-chip voltage regulator.

2.9. Power Supplies

**154**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 19. powering the chip from a single 1.8V supply_

**==> picture [297 x 259] intentionally omitted <==**
