## **2.10. Core Supply Regulator**

RP2040 includes an on-chip voltage regulator, allowing the digital core supply (DVDD) to be generated from an external, nominally 1.8V to 3.3V, power supply. In most cases, the regulator’s input supply will share an external power source with the chip’s digital IO supply IOVDD, simplifying the overall power supply requirements.

To allow the chip to start up, the voltage regulator is enabled by default and will power-on as soon as its input supply is available. Once the chip is out of reset, the regulator can be disabled, placed into a high impedance state, or have its output voltage adjusted, under software control. The output voltage can be set in the range 0.80V to 1.30V in 50mV steps, but is set to a nominal 1.1V at initial power-on, or after a reset event. The voltage regulator can supply up to 100mA.

Although intended to provide the chip’s digital core supply (DVDD), the voltage regulator can be used for other purposes if DVDD is powered directly from an external power supply.

## **2.10.1. Application Circuit**

2.10. Core Supply Regulator

**155**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 20. voltage regulator application circuit_

**==> picture [297 x 259] intentionally omitted <==**

The regulator must have 1μF capacitors placed close to its input (VREG_VIN) and output (VREG_VOUT) pins.

## **2.10.2. Operating Modes**

The voltage regulator operates in one of three modes. The mode to be used being selected by writing to the EN and HIZ fields in the VREG register, as shown in Table 187. At initial power-on, or following a reset event, the voltage regulator will be in _Normal Operation_ mode.

_Table 187. Voltage Regulator Mode Select_

|**Mode**|**EN**|**HIZ**|
|---|---|---|
|Normal Operationa|1|0|
|High Impedance|1|1|
|Shutdown|0|X|



a the voltage regulator will be in normal mode at initial power-on or following a reset event

## **2.10.2.1. Normal Operation Mode**

In Normal Operation mode, the voltage regulator’s output is in regulation at the selected voltage, and the regulator is able to supply power.

## **2.10.2.2. High Impedance Mode**

In High Impedance mode, the voltage regulator is disabled and its output pin (VREG_VOUT) is set to a high impedance state. In this mode, the regulator’s power consumption is minimised. This mode allows a load connected to VREG_VOUT to be powered from a power source other than the on-chip regulator. This could allow, for example, the load to be initially powered from the on-chip voltage regulator, and then switched to an external regulator under software control. The external regulator would also need to support a high impedance mode, with only one regulator supplying the load at a time. The supply voltage is maintained by the regulator’s output capacitor during the brief period when both regulators are in high impedance mode.

2.10. Core Supply Regulator

**156**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.10.2.3. Shutdown Mode**

In Shutdown mode, the voltage regulator is disabled, power consumption is minimized and the regulator’s output pin (VREG_VOUT) is pulled to 0V.

Shutdown mode is only useful if the voltage regulator is not providing the RP2040’s digital core supply (DVDD). If the regulator is supplying DVDD, and brown-out detection is enabled, entering shutdown mode will cause a reset event and the voltage regulator will return to normal mode. If brown-out detection isn’t enabled, the voltage regulator will shut down and will remain in shutdown mode until its input supply (VREG_VIN) is power cycled.

## **2.10.3. Output Voltage Select**

The required output voltage can be selected by writing to the VSEL field in the VREG register. The voltage regulator’s output voltage can be set in the range 0.80V to 1.30V in 50mV intervals. The regulator output voltage is set to 1.1V at initial power-on or following a reset event. For details, see the VREG register description.

Note that RP2040 may not operate reliably with its digital core supply (DVDD) outside of operating conditions (see Section 5.6); it is recommended to set the regulator to 1.10V for most applications.

## **2.10.4. Status**

The VREG register contains a single status field, ROK, which indicates whether the voltage regulator’s output is being correctly regulated.

At power on, ROK remains low until the regulator has started up and the output voltage reaches the ROK assertion threshold (ROKTH.ASSERT). It then remains high until the voltage drops below the ROK deassertion threshold (ROKTH.DEASSERT), remaining low until the output voltage is above the assertion threshold again. ROKTH.ASSERT is nominally 90% of the selected output voltage, 0.99V if the selected output voltage is 1.1V, and ROKTH.DEASSERT is nominally 87% of the selected output voltage, 0.957V if the selected output voltage is 1.1V.

Note that adjusting the output voltage to a higher voltage will cause ROK to go low until the assertion threshold for the higher voltage is reached. ROK will also go low if the regulator is placed in high impedance mode.

## **2.10.5. Current Limit**

The voltage regulator includes a current limit to prevent the load current exceeding the maximum rated value. The output voltage will not be regulated and will drop below the selected value when the current limit is active.

## **2.10.6. List of Registers**

The voltage regulator shares a register address space with the chip-level reset subsystem. The registers for both subsystems are listed here. Only, the VREG register is part of the voltage register subsystem. The BOD and CHIP_RESET registers are part of the chip-level reset subsystem. The shared address space is referred to as vreg_and_chip_reset elsewhere in this document.

The VREG_AND_CHIP_RESET registers start at a base address of 0x40064000 (defined as VREG_AND_CHIP_RESET_BASE in SDK).

_Table 188. List of VREG_AND_CHIP_RES ET registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x0|VREG|Voltage regulator control and status|
|0x4|BOD|brown-out detection control|
|0x8|CHIP_RESET|Chip reset control and status|



2.10. Core Supply Regulator

**157**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **VREG_AND_CHIP_RESET: VREG Register**

## **Offset** : 0x0

## **Description**

Voltage regulator control and status

|_Table 189. VREG_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:13|Reserved.|-|-|
||12|**ROK**: regulation status<br>0=not in regulation, 1=in regulation|RO|0x0|
||11:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:4|**VSEL**: output voltage select<br>0000 to 0101 - 0.80V<br>0110 - 0.85V<br>0111 - 0.90V<br>1000 - 0.95V<br>1001 - 1.00V<br>1010 - 1.05V<br>1011 - 1.10V (default)<br>1100 - 1.15V<br>1101 - 1.20V<br>1110 - 1.25V<br>1111 - 1.30V|RW|0xb|
||3:2|Reserved.|-|-|
||1|**HIZ**: high impedance mode select<br>0=not in high impedance mode, 1=in high impedance mode|RW|0x0|
||0|**EN**: enable<br>0=not enabled, 1=enabled|RW|0x1|



## **VREG_AND_CHIP_RESET: BOD Register**

**Offset** : 0x4

## **Description**

brown-out detection control

|_Table 190. BOD_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|



2.10. Core Supply Regulator

**158**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|7:4|**VSEL**: threshold select<br>0000 - 0.473V<br>0001 - 0.516V<br>0010 - 0.559V<br>0011 - 0.602V<br>0100 - 0.645V<br>0101 - 0.688V<br>0110 - 0.731V<br>0111 - 0.774V<br>1000 - 0.817V<br>1001 - 0.860V (default)<br>1010 - 0.903V<br>1011 - 0.946V<br>1100 - 0.989V<br>1101 - 1.032V<br>1110 - 1.075V<br>1111 - 1.118V|RW|0x9|
|3:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**EN**: enable<br>0=not enabled, 1=enabled|RW|0x1|



## **VREG_AND_CHIP_RESET: CHIP_RESET Register**

**Offset** : 0x8

## **Description**

Chip reset control and status

_Table 191. CHIP_RESET Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:25|Reserved.|-|-|
|24|**PSM_RESTART_FLAG**: This is set by psm_restart from the debugger.<br>Its purpose is to branch bootcode to a safe mode when the debugger has<br>issued a psm_restart in order to recover from a boot lock-up.<br>In the safe mode the debugger can repair the boot code, clear this flag then<br>reboot the processor.|WC|0x0|
|23:21|Reserved.|-|-|
|20|**HAD_PSM_RESTART**: Last reset was from the debug port|RO|0x0|
|19:17|Reserved.|-|-|
|16|**HAD_RUN**: Last reset was from the RUN pin|RO|0x0|
|15:9|Reserved.|-|-|
|8|**HAD_POR**: Last reset was from the power-on reset or brown-out detection<br>blocks|RO|0x0|
|7:0|Reserved.|-|-|



2.10. Core Supply Regulator

**159**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.10.7. Detailed Specifications**

_Table 192. Voltage Regulator Detailed Specifications_

|**Parameter**|**Description**|**Min**|**Typ**|**Max**|**Units**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|VVREG_VIN|input supply<br>voltage|1.63|1.8 - 3.3|3.63|V|
|ΔVVREG_VOUT|output voltage<br>variation|-3||+3|% of selected<br>output voltage|
|IMAX|output current|||100|mA|
|ILIMIT|current limit|150|350|450|mA|
|ROKTH.ASSERT|ROKassertion<br>threshold|87|90|93|% of selected<br>output voltage|
|ROKTH.DEASSERT|ROKdeassertion<br>threshold|84|87|90|% of selected<br>output voltage|
|tPOWER-ON<br>a|power-up time||275|350|μs|



a values will vary with load current and capacitance on VREG_VOUT. Conditions: EN = 1, load current = 0mA, VREG_VIN ramps up in 100μs
