## **2.12. Chip-Level Reset**

## **2.12.1. Overview**

The chip-level reset subsystem resets the whole chip, placing it in a default state. This happens at initial power-on, during a power supply brown-out event or when the chip’s RUN pin is taken low. The chip can also be reset via the

2.12. Chip-Level Reset

**163**

RP2040 Datasheet

Rescue Debug Port. See Section 2.3.4.2, “Rescue DP” for details.

The subsystem has two reset outputs. rst_n_psm, which resets the whole chip, except the debug port, and rst_n_dp, which only resets the Rescue DP. Both resets are held low at initial power-on, during a brown-out event or when RUN is low. rst_n_psm can additionally be held low by the Rescue DP via the subsystem’s psm_restart input. This allows the chip to be reset via the Rescue DP without resetting the Rescue DP itself. The subsystem releases chip level reset by taking rst_n_psm high, handing control to the Power-on State Machine, which continues to start up the chip. See Section 2.13, “Power-On State Machine” for details.

The chip level reset subsystem is shown in Figure 21, and more information is available in the following sections.

_Figure 21. The chiplevel reset subsystem_

**==> picture [297 x 141] intentionally omitted <==**

## **2.12.2. Power-on Reset**

The power-on reset block makes sure the chip starts up cleanly when power is first applied by holding it in reset until the digital core supply (DVDD) can reliably power the chip’s core logic. The block holds its por_n output low until DVDD has been above the _power-on reset threshold_ (DVDDTH.POR) for a period greater than the _power-on reset assertion delay_ (tPOR.ASSERT). Once high, por_n remains high even if DVDD subsequently falls below DVDDTH.POR, unless brown-out detection is enabled. The behaviour of por_n when power is applied is shown in Figure 22.

DVDDTH.POR is fixed at a nominal 0.957V, which should result in a threshold between 0.924V and 0.99V. The threshold assumes a nominal DVDD of 1.1V at initial power-on, and por_n may never go high if a lower voltage is used. Once the chip is out of reset, DVDD can be reduced without por_n going low, as long as brown-out detection has been disabled or a suitable threshold voltage has been set.

_Figure 22. A power-on reset cycle_

**==> picture [297 x 198] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
DVDDTH.POR<br>DVDD<br>tPOR.ASSERT<br>por_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


2.12. Chip-Level Reset

**164**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.12.2.1. Detailed Specifications**

_Table 193. Power-on Reset Parameters_

|**Parameter**|**Description**|**Min**|**Typ**|**Max**|**Units**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DVDDTH.POR|power-on reset<br>threshold|0.924|0.957|0.99|V|
|tPOR.ASSERT|power-on reset<br>assertion delay||3|10|μs|



## **2.12.3. Brown-out Detection**

The brown-out detection block prevents unreliable operation by initiating a power-on reset cycle if the digital core supply (DVDD) drops below a safe operating level. The block’s bod_n output is taken low if DVDD drops below the _brown-out detection threshold_ (DVDDTH.BOD) for a period longer than the _brown-out detection assertion delay_ (tBOD.ASSERT). This reinitialises the power-on reset block, which resets the chip, by taking its por_n output low, and holds it in reset until DVDD returns to a safe operating level. Figure 23 shows a brown-out event and the subsequent power-on reset cycle.

_Figure 23. A brown-out detection cycle_

**==> picture [297 x 168] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
DVDDTH.POR<br>DVDD DVDDTH.BOD<br>tPOR.ASSERT<br>por_n<br>tBOD.ASSERT<br>bod_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **2.12.3.1. Detection Enable**

Brown-out detection is automatically enabled at initial power-on or after a brown-out initiated reset. There is, however, a short delay, the _brown-out detection activation delay_ (tBOD.ACTIVE), between por_n going high and detection becoming active. This is shown in Figure 24.

_Figure 24. Activation of brown-out detection at initial power-on and following a brown-out event._

**==> picture [297 x 156] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
DVDD DVDDTH.POR DVDDTH.BOD DVDDTH.POR<br>tPOR.ASSERT tPOR.ASSERT<br>por_n<br>tBOD.ASSERT<br>bod_n<br>tBOD.ACTIVE tBOD.ACTIVE<br>detection  detection  detection  detection<br>inactive active inactive active<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Once the chip is out of reset, detection can be disabled under software control. This also saves a small amount of power. If detection is subsequently re-enabled, there will be another short delay, the _brown-out detection enable delay_ (tBOD.ENABLE), before it becomes active again. This is shown in Figure 25.

2.12. Chip-Level Reset

**165**

RP2040 Datasheet

Detection is disabled by writing a zero to the EN field in the BOD register and is re-enabled by writing a one to the same field. The block’s bod_n output is high when detection is disabled.

_Figure 25. Disabling and enabling brownout detection_

**==> picture [297 x 111] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
EN 1 0 1<br>tBOD.ENABLE<br>detection  detection  detection<br>inactive inactive active<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Detection is re-enabled if the BOD register is reset, as this sets the register’s EN field to one. Again, detection will become active after a delay equal to the _brown-out detection enable delay_ (tBOD.ENABLE).

##  **NOTE**

If the BOD register is reset by a power-on or brown-out initiated reset, the delay between the register being reset and brown-out detection becoming active will be equal to the _brown-out detection activation delay_ (tBOD.ACTIVE). The delay will be equal to the _brown-out detection enable delay_ (tBOD.ENABLE) for all other reset sources.

## **2.12.3.2. Adjusting the Detection Threshold**

The _brown-out detection threshold_ (DVDDTH.BOD) has a nominal value of 0.86V at initial power-on or after a reset event. This should result in a detection threshold between 0.83V and 0.89V. Once out of reset, the threshold can be adjusted under software control. The new detection threshold will take effect after the _brown-out detection programming delay_ ((tBOD.PROG). An example of this is shown in Figure 26.

The threshold is adjusted by writing to the VSEL field in the BOD register. See the BOD register description for details.

_Figure 26. Adjusting the brown-out detection threshold_

**==> picture [297 x 157] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
VSEL 1001 0111<br>tBOD.PROG<br>threshold  threshold<br>0.86V 0.774V<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **2.12.3.3. Detailed Specifications**

_Table 194. Brown-out Detection Parameters_

|**Parameter**|**Description**|**Min**|**Typ**|**Max**|**Units**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DVDDTH.BOD|brown-out<br>detection<br>threshold|96.5|100|103.5|% of selected<br>threshold voltage|
|tBOD.ACTIVE|brown-out<br>detection<br>activation delay||55|80|μs|



2.12. Chip-Level Reset

**166**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Parameter**|**Description**|**Min**|**Typ**|**Max**|**Units**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|tBOD.ASSERT|brown-out<br>detection<br>assertion delay||3|10|μs|
|tBOD.ENABLE|brown-out<br>detection enable<br>delay||35|55|μs|
|tBOD.PROG|brown-out<br>detection<br>programming<br>delay||20|30|μs|



## **2.12.4. Supply Monitor**

The power-on and brown-out reset blocks are powered by the on-chip voltage regulator’s input supply (VREG_VIN). The blocks are initialised when power is first applied, but may not be reliably re-initialised if power is removed and then reapplied before VREG_VIN has dropped to a sufficiently low level. To prevent this happening, VREG_VIN is monitored and the power-on reset block is re-initialised if it drops below the _VREG_VIN activation threshold_ (VREG_VINTH.ACTIVE). VREG_VINTH.ACTIVE is fixed at a nominal 1.1V, which should result in a threshold between 0.87V and 1.26V. This threshold does not represent a safe operating voltage. It is the voltage that VREG_VIN must drop below to reliably re-initialise the power-on reset block. For safe operation, VREG_VIN must be at a nominal voltage between 1.8V and 3.3V.

## **2.12.4.1. Detailed Specifications**

_Table 195. Voltage Regulator Input Supply Monitor Parameters_

|**Parameter**|**Description**|**Min**|**Typ**|**Max**|**Units**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|VREG_VINTH.ACTIVE|VREG_VIN<br>activation<br>threshold|0.87|1.1|1.26|V|



## **2.12.5. External Reset**

The chip can also be reset by taking its RUN pin low. Taking RUN low will hold the chip in reset irrespective of the state of the core power supply (DVDD) and the power-on reset / brown-out detection blocks. The chip will come out of reset as soon as RUN is taken high, if all other reset sources have been released. RUN can be used to extend the initial poweron reset, or can be driven from an external source to start and stop the chip as required. If RUN is not used, it should be tied high.

## **2.12.6. Rescue Debug Port Reset**

The chip can also be reset via the Rescue Debug Port. This allows the chip to be recovered from a locked up state. In addition to resetting the chip, a Rescue Debug Port reset also sets the PSM_RESTART_FLAG in the CHIP_RESET register. This is checked by the bootcode at startup, causing it to enter a safe state if the bit is set. See Section 2.3.4.2, “Rescue DP” for more information.

2.12. Chip-Level Reset

**167**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.12.7. Source of Last Reset**

The source of the most recent chip-level reset can be determined by reading the state of the HAD_POR, HAD_RUN and HAD_PSM_RESTART fields in the CHIP_RESET register. A one in the HAD_POR field indicates a power supply related reset, i.e. either a power-on or brown-out initiated reset, a one in the HAD_RUN field indicates the chip was last reset by the RUN pin, and a one in the HAD_PSM_RESTART field indicates the chip has been reset via Rescue Debug Port. There should never be more than one field set to one.

## **2.12.8. List of Registers**

The chip-level reset subsystem shares a register address space with the on-chip voltage regulator. The registers for both subsystems are listed in Section 2.10.6. The shared address space is referred to as vreg_and_chip_reset elsewhere in this document.
