## **2.16. Crystal Oscillator (XOSC)**

## **2.16.1. Overview**

The Crystal Oscillator (XOSC) uses an external crystal to produce an accurate reference clock. The RP2040 supports 1MHz to 15MHz crystals and the RP2040 reference design (see the Minimal Design Example in Hardware design with RP2040) uses a 12MHz crystal. The reference clock is distributed to the PLLs, which can be used to multiply the XOSC frequency to provide accurate high speed clocks. For example, they can generate a 48MHz clock which meets the frequency accuracy requirement of the USB interface and a 133MHz maximum speed system clock. The XOSC clock is also a clock source for the clock generators, so can be used directly if required.

If the user already has an accurate clock source then it is possible to drive an external clock directly into XIN (aka XI), and disable the oscillator circuit. In this mode XIN can be driven at up to 50MHz.

If the user wants to use the XOSC clock outside the RP2040 then it must be routed out to a GPIO via a clk_gpout clock generator. It is not recommended to take it directly from XIN (aka XI) or XOUT (aka XO).

_Figure 33. XOSC overview_

**==> picture [178 x 73] intentionally omitted <==**

## **2.16.1.1. Recommended Crystals**

For the best performance and stability across typical operating temperature ranges, it is recommended to use the Abracon ABM8-272-T3. You can source the ABM8-272-T3 directly from Abracon or from an authorised reseller. The Abracon ABM8-272-T3 has the following specifications:

_Table 257. Key Crystal Specifications._

|**Parameters**|**Minimum**|**Typical**|**Maximum**|**Units**|**Notes**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Center Frequency|12.000|12.000|12.000|MHz||
|Operation Mode|Fundamental-AT|Fundamental-AT|Fundamental-AT|||
|Operating Temperature|-40||+85|ºC||
|Storage Temperature|-55||+125|ºC||
|Frequency Tolerance (25ºC)|-30||+30|ppm||
|Frequency Stability (25ºC)|-30||+30|ppm||
|Equivalent Series Resistance (R1)|||50|Ω||
|Shunt Capacitance (C0)|||3.0|pF||
|Load Capacitance (CL)|10|10|10|pF||
|Drive Level||10|200|µW||
|Aging|-5||+5|ppm|@25±3°C, 1st year|



2.16. Crystal Oscillator (XOSC)

**216**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Parameters**|**Minimum**|**Typical**|**Maximum**|**Units**|**Notes**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Insulation Resistance|500|||MΩ|@100Vdc±15V|



Even if you use a crystal with similar specifications, you will need to test the circuit over a range of temperatures to ensure stability.

The crystal oscillator is powered from the VDDIO voltage. As a result, the Abracon crystal and that particular damping resistor are tuned for 3.3V operation. If you use a different IO voltage, you will need to re-tune.

Any changes to crystal parameters risk instability across any components connected to the crystal circuit.

If you can’t source the recommended crystal directly from Abracon or a reseller, contact applications@raspberrypi.com.

Raspberry Pi Pico has been specifically tuned for the specifications of the Abracon ABM8-272-T3 crystal. For an example of how to use a crystal with RP2040, see the Raspberry Pi Pico board schematic in Appendix B of the Raspberry Pi Pico Datasheet and the Raspberry Pi Pico design files.

## **2.16.2. Usage**

The XOSC is disabled on chip startup and the RP2040 boots using the Ring Oscillator (ROSC). To start the XOSC, the programmer must set the CTRL_ENABLE register. The XOSC is not immediately usable because it takes time for the oscillations to build to sufficient amplitude. This time will be dependent on the chosen crystal but will be of the order of a few milliseconds. The XOSC incorporates a timer controlled by the STARTUP_DELAY register for automatically managing this and setting a flag (STATUS_STABLE) when the XOSC clock is usable.

## **2.16.3. Startup Delay**

The STARTUP_DELAY register specifies how many clock cycles must be seen from the crystal before it can be used. This is specified in multiples of 256. The SDK xosc_init function sets this value. The 1ms default is sufficient for the RP2040 reference design (see the Minimal Design Example in Hardware design with RP2040) which runs the XOSC at 12MHz. When the timer expires, the STATUS_STABLE flag will be set to indicate the XOSC output can be used.

Before starting the XOSC the programmer must ensure the STARTUP_DELAY register is correctly configured. The required value can be calculated by:

**==> picture [109 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

So with a 12MHz crystal and a 1ms wait time, the calculation is:

**==> picture [120 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

##  **NOTE**

The value is rounded up to the nearest integer so the wait time will be just over 1ms

## **2.16.4. XOSC Counter**

The COUNT register provides a method of managing short software delays. Writing a value to the COUNT register automatically triggers it to start counting down to zero at the XOSC frequency. The programmer then simply polls the register until it reaches zero. This is preferable to using NOPs in software loops because it is independent of the core clock frequency, the compiler and the execution time of the compiled code.

2.16. Crystal Oscillator (XOSC)

**217**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **2.16.5. DORMANT mode**

In DORMANT mode (see Section 2.11.3) all of the on-chip clocks can be paused to save power. This is particularly useful in battery-powered applications. The RP2040 is woken from DORMANT mode by an interrupt either from an external event such as an edge on a GPIO pin or from the on-chip RTC. This must be configured before entering DORMANT mode. If the RTC is being used to trigger wake-up then it must be clocked from an external source. To enter DORMANT mode the programmer must then switch all internal clocks to be driven from XOSC or ROSC and stop the PLLs. Then a specific 32-bit value must be written to the DORMANT register in the chosen oscillator (XOSC or ROSC) to stop it oscillating. When exiting DORMANT mode the chosen oscillator will restart. If XOSC is chosen then the frequency will be more precise but the restart time is longer due to the startup delay (>1ms on the RP2040 reference design (see the Minimal Design Example in Hardware design with RP2040)). If ROSC is chosen then the frequency is less precise but the start-up time is very short (approximately 1μs).

##  **NOTE**

The PLLs must be stopped before entering DORMANT mode

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_xosc/xosc.c Lines 56 - 63_

56 void xosc_dormant(void) { 57 _// WARNING: This stops the xosc until woken up by an irq_ 58     xosc_hw->dormant = XOSC_DORMANT_VALUE_DORMANT; 59 _// Wait for it to become stable once woken up_ 60     while(!(xosc_hw->status & XOSC_STATUS_STABLE_BITS)) { 61         tight_loop_contents(); 62     } 63 }

##  **WARNING**

If no IRQ is configured before going into DORMANT mode the XOSC or ROSC will never restart.

See Section 2.11.5.2 for a complete example of DORMANT mode using the XOSC.

## **2.16.6. Programmer’s Model**

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2040/hardware_structs/include/hardware/structs/xosc.h Lines 27 - 59_

27 typedef struct { 28     _REG_(XOSC_CTRL_OFFSET) _// XOSC_CTRL_ 29 _// Crystal Oscillator Control_ 30 _// 0x00fff000 [23:12] ENABLE       (-) On power-up this field is initialised to DISABLE and the..._ 31 _// 0x00000fff [11:0]  FREQ_RANGE   (-) Frequency range_ 32     io_rw_32 ctrl; 33 34     _REG_(XOSC_STATUS_OFFSET) _// XOSC_STATUS_ 35 _// Crystal Oscillator Status_ 36 _// 0x80000000 [31]    STABLE       (0) Oscillator is running and stable_ 37 _// 0x01000000 [24]    BADWRITE     (0) An invalid value has been written to CTRL_ENABLE or..._ 38 _// 0x00001000 [12]    ENABLED      (-) Oscillator is enabled but not necessarily running and..._ 39 _// 0x00000003 [1:0]   FREQ_RANGE   (-) The current frequency range setting, always reads 0_ 40     io_rw_32 status; 41

2.16. Crystal Oscillator (XOSC)

**218**

RP2040 Datasheet

42     _REG_(XOSC_DORMANT_OFFSET) _// XOSC_DORMANT_ 43 _// Crystal Oscillator pause control_ 44 _// 0xffffffff [31:0]  DORMANT      (-) This is used to save power by pausing the XOSC +_ 45     io_rw_32 dormant; 46 47     _REG_(XOSC_STARTUP_OFFSET) _// XOSC_STARTUP_ 48 _// Controls the startup delay_ 49 _// 0x00100000 [20]    X4           (-) Multiplies the startup_delay by 4_ 50 _// 0x00003fff [13:0]  DELAY        (-) in multiples of 256*xtal_period_ 51     io_rw_32 startup; 52 53     uint32_t _pad0[3]; 54 55     _REG_(XOSC_COUNT_OFFSET) _// XOSC_COUNT_ 56 _// A down counter running at the XOSC frequency which counts to zero and stops._ 57 _// 0x000000ff [7:0]   COUNT        (0x00)_ 58     io_rw_32 count; 59 } xosc_hw_t;

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_xosc/xosc.c Lines 29 - 43_

29 void xosc_init(void) { 30 _// Assumes 1-15 MHz input, checked above._ 31     xosc_hw->ctrl = XOSC_CTRL_FREQ_RANGE_VALUE_1_15MHZ; 32 33 _// Set xosc startup delay_ 34     xosc_hw->startup = STARTUP_DELAY; 35 36 _// Set the enable bit now that we have set freq range and startup delay_ 37     hw_set_bits(&xosc_hw->ctrl, XOSC_CTRL_ENABLE_VALUE_ENABLE << XOSC_CTRL_ENABLE_LSB); 38 39 _// Wait for XOSC to be stable_ 40     while(!(xosc_hw->status & XOSC_STATUS_STABLE_BITS)) { 41         tight_loop_contents(); 42     } 43 }

## **2.16.7. List of Registers**

The XOSC registers start at a base address of 0x40024000 (defined as XOSC_BASE in SDK).

_Table 258. List of XOSC registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|CTRL|Crystal Oscillator Control|
|0x04|STATUS|Crystal Oscillator Status|
|0x08|DORMANT|Crystal Oscillator pause control|
|0x0c|STARTUP|Controls the startup delay|
|0x1c|COUNT|A down counter running at the XOSC frequency which counts to<br>zero and stops.|



## **XOSC: CTRL Register**

**Offset** : 0x00

2.16. Crystal Oscillator (XOSC)

**219**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Crystal Oscillator Control

_Table 259. CTRL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:12|**ENABLE**: On power-up this field is initialised to DISABLE and the chip runs<br>from the ROSC.<br>If the chip has subsequently been programmed to run from the XOSC then<br>setting this field to DISABLE may lock-up the chip. If this is a concern then run<br>the clk_ref from the ROSC and enable the clk_sys RESUS feature.<br>The 12-bit code is intended to give some protection against accidental writes.<br>An invalid setting will enable the oscillator.|RW|-|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0xd1e→DISABLE|||
||0xfab→ENABLE|||
|11:0|**FREQ_RANGE**: Frequency range. This resets to 0xAA0 and cannot be changed.|RW|-|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0xaa0→1_15MHZ|||
||0xaa1→RESERVED_1|||
||0xaa2→RESERVED_2|||
||0xaa3→RESERVED_3|||



## **XOSC: STATUS Register**

**Offset** : 0x04

## **Description**

Crystal Oscillator Status

|_Table 260. STATUS_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**STABLE**: Oscillator is running and stable|RO|0x0|
||30:25|Reserved.|-|-|
||24|**BADWRITE**: An invalid value has been written to CTRL_ENABLE or<br>CTRL_FREQ_RANGE or DORMANT|WC|0x0|
||23:13|Reserved.|-|-|
||12|**ENABLED**: Oscillator is enabled but not necessarily running and stable, resets<br>to 0|RO|-|
||11:2|Reserved.|-|-|
||1:0|**FREQ_RANGE**: The current frequency range setting, always reads 0|RO|-|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→1_15MHZ|||
|||0x1→RESERVED_1|||
|||0x2→RESERVED_2|||
|||0x3→RESERVED_3|||



2.16. Crystal Oscillator (XOSC)

**220**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **XOSC: DORMANT Register**

## **Offset** : 0x08

## **Description**

Crystal Oscillator pause control

|_Table 261. DORMANT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|This is used to save power by pausing the XOSC<br>On power-up this field is initialised to WAKE<br>An invalid write will also select WAKE<br>WARNING: stop the PLLs before selecting dormant mode<br>WARNING: setup the irq before selecting dormant mode|RW|-|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x636f6d61→DORMANT|||
|||0x77616b65→WAKE|||



## **XOSC: STARTUP Register**

## **Offset** : 0x0c

## **Description**

Controls the startup delay

|_Table 262. STARTUP_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:21|Reserved.|-|-|
||20|**X4**: Multiplies the startup_delay by 4. This is of little value to the user given<br>that the delay can be programmed directly.|RW|0x0|
||19:14|Reserved.|-|-|
||13:0|**DELAY**: in multiples of 256*xtal_period. The reset value of 0xc4 corresponds<br>to approx 50 000 cycles.|RW|0x00c4|



## **XOSC: COUNT Register**

## **Offset** : 0x1c

|_Table 263. COUNT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|A down counter running at the xosc frequency which counts to zero and stops.<br>To start the counter write a non-zero value.<br>Can be used for short software pauses when setting up time sensitive<br>hardware.|RW|0x00|
