## **2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)**

## **2.17.1. Overview**

The Ring Oscillator (ROSC) is an on-chip oscillator built from a ring of inverters. It requires no external components and is started automatically during RP2040 power up. It provides the clock to the cores during boot. The frequency of the

2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**221**

RP2040 Datasheet

ROSC is programmable and it can directly provide a high speed clock to the cores, but the frequency varies with Process, Voltage and Temperature (PVT) so it cannot provide clocks for components which require an accurate frequency such as the RTC, USB and ADC. Methods for mitigating the frequency variation are discussed in Section 2.15 but these are only relevant to very low power design. For most applications requiring accurate clock frequencies it is recommended to switch to the XOSC and PLLs. During boot the ROSC runs at a nominal 6.5MHz and is guaranteed to be in the range 1.8MHz to 12MHz.

Once the chip has booted the programmer can choose to continue running from the ROSC and increase its frequency or start the Crystal Oscillator (XOSC) and PLLs. The ROSC can be disabled after the system clocks have been switched to the XOSC. Each oscillator has advantages and the programmer can switch between them to achieve the best solution for the application.

_Figure 34. ROSC overview._

**==> picture [297 x 102] intentionally omitted <==**

## **2.17.2. ROSC/XOSC trade-offs**

The advantages of the ROSC are its flexibility and its low power. Also, there is no requirement for internal or external components when using the ROSC to provide clocks. Its frequency is programmable so it can be used to provide a fast core clock without starting the PLLs and can be divided by clock generators (Section 2.15) to generate slower peripheral clocks. The ROSC starts immediately and responds immediately to the frequency controls. It will retain the frequency setting when entering and exiting the DORMANT state (see Section 2.11.3). However, the user must be aware that the frequency may have drifted when exiting the DORMANT state due to changes in the supply voltage and the chip temperature.

The disadvantage of the ROSC is its frequency variation with PVT (Process, Voltage & Temperature) which makes it unsuitable for generating precise clocks or for applications where software execution timing is important. However, the PVT frequency variation can be exploited to provide automatic frequency scaling to maximise performance. This is discussed in Section 2.15.

The only advantage of the XOSC is its accurate frequency, but this is an overriding requirement in many applications.

The disadvantages of the XOSC are its requirement for external components (a crystal etc), its higher power consumption, slow startup time (>1ms) and fixed, low frequency. PLLs are required to produce higher frequency clocks. They consume more power and take significant time to start up and to change frequency. Exiting DORMANT mode is much slower than for ROSC because the XOSC must be restarted and the PLLs must be reconfigured.

## **2.17.3. Modifying the frequency**

The ROSC is arranged as 8 stages, each with programmable drive. There are 2 methods of controlling the frequency. The frequency range controls the number of stages in the ROSC loop and the FREQA & FREQB registers control the drive strength of the stages.

The frequency range is changed by writing to the FREQ_RANGE register which controls the number of stages in the ROSC loop. The default LOW range has 8 (stages 0-7), MEDIUM has 6 (stages 2-7), HIGH has 4 (stages 4-7) and TOOHIGH has 2 (stages 6-7). It is recommended to change FREQ_RANGE one step at a time until the desired range is reached. The ROSC output will not glitch when increasing the frequency range, so the output clock can continue to be used. However, that is not true when going back down the frequency range. An alternate clock source must be selected for the modules clocked by ROSC, or they must be held in reset during the transition. The behaviour has not been fully characterised but the MEDIUM range will be approximately 1.33 times the LOW RANGE, the HIGH range will be 2 times

2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**222**

RP2040 Datasheet

the LOW range and the TOOHIGH range will be 4 times the LOW range. The TOOHIGH range is aptly named. It should not be used because the internal logic of the ROSC will not run at that frequency.

The FREQA & FREQB registers control the drive strength of the stages in the ROSC loop. Increasing the drive strength reduces the delay through the stage and increases the oscillation frequency. Each stage has 3 drive strength control bits. Each bit turns on additional drive, therefore each stage has 4 drive strength settings equal to the number of bits set, with 0 being the default, 1 being double drive, 2 being triple drive and 3 being quadruple drive. Turning on extra drive will not have a linear effect on frequency, setting a second bit will have less impact than setting the first bit and so on. To ensure smooth transitions it is recommended to change one drive strength bit at a time. When FREQ_RANGE is used to shorten the ROSC loop, the bypassed stages still propagate the signal and therefore their drive strengths must be set to at least the same level as the lowest drive strength in the stages that are in the loop. This will not affect the oscillation frequency.

## **2.17.4. ROSC divider**

The ROSC frequency is too fast to be used directly so is divided in an integer divider controlled by the DIV register. DIV can be changed while the ROSC is running, the output clock will change frequency without glitching. The default divisor is 16 which ensures the output clock is in the range 1.8 to 12MHz on chip startup.

The divider has 2 outputs, rosc_clksrc and rosc_clksrc_ph, the second being a phase shifted version of the first. This is primarily intended for use during product development and the outputs will be identical if the PHASE register is left in its default state.

## **2.17.5. Random Number Generator**

If the system clocks are running from the XOSC and/or PLLs the ROSC can be used to generate random numbers. Simply enable the ROSC and read the RANDOMBIT register to get a 1-bit random number and read it n times to get an n- bit value. This does not meet the requirements of randomness for security systems because it can be compromised, but it may be useful in less critical applications. If the cores are running from the ROSC then the value will not be random because the timing of the register read will be correlated to the phase of the ROSC.

## **2.17.6. ROSC Counter**

The COUNT register provides a method of managing short software delays. Writing a value to the COUNT register automatically triggers it to start counting down to zero at the ROSC frequency. The programmer then simply polls the register until it reaches zero. This is preferable to using NOPs in software loops because it is independent of the core clock frequency, the compiler and the execution time of the compiled code.

## **2.17.7. DORMANT mode**

In DORMANT mode (see Section 2.11.3) all of the on-chip clocks can be paused to save power. This is particularly useful in battery-powered applications. The RP2040 is woken from DORMANT mode by an interrupt either from an external event such as an edge on a GPIO pin or from the on-chip RTC. This must be configured before entering DORMANT mode. If the RTC is being used to trigger wake-up then it must be clocked from an external source. To enter DORMANT mode the programmer must then switch all internal clocks to be driven from XOSC or ROSC and stop the PLLs. Then a specific 32-bit value must be written to the DORMANT register in the chosen oscillator (XOSC or ROSC) to stop it oscillating. When exiting DORMANT mode the chosen oscillator will restart. If XOSC is chosen then the frequency will be more precise but the restart time is longer due to the startup delay (>1ms on the RP2040 reference design (see the Minimal Design Example in Hardware design with RP2040)). If ROSC is chosen then the frequency is less precise but the start-up time is very short (approximately 1μs).

2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**223**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Extras: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-extras/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_rosc/rosc.c Lines 56 - 61_

56 void rosc_set_dormant(void) { 57 _// WARNING: This stops the rosc until woken up by an irq_ 58     rosc_write(&rosc_hw->dormant, ROSC_DORMANT_VALUE_DORMANT); 59 _// Wait for it to become stable once woken up_ 60     while(!(rosc_hw->status & ROSC_STATUS_STABLE_BITS)); 61 }

##  **WARNING**

If no IRQ is configured before going into dormant mode the ROSC will never restart.

See Section 2.11.5.2 for a some examples of dormant mode.

## **2.17.8. List of Registers**

The ROSC registers start at a base address of 0x40060000 (defined as ROSC_BASE in SDK).

_Table 264. List of ROSC registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|CTRL|Ring Oscillator control|
|0x04|FREQA|Ring Oscillator frequency control A|
|0x08|FREQB|Ring Oscillator frequency control B|
|0x0c|DORMANT|Ring Oscillator pause control|
|0x10|DIV|Controls the output divider|
|0x14|PHASE|Controls the phase shifted output|
|0x18|STATUS|Ring Oscillator Status|
|0x1c|RANDOMBIT|Returns a 1 bit random value|
|0x20|COUNT|A down counter running at the ROSC frequency which counts to<br>zero and stops.|



## **ROSC: CTRL Register**

## **Offset** : 0x00

## **Description**

Ring Oscillator control

_Table 265. CTRL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:12|**ENABLE**: On power-up this field is initialised to ENABLE<br>The system clock must be switched to another source before setting this field<br>to DISABLE otherwise the chip will lock up<br>The 12-bit code is intended to give some protection against accidental writes.<br>An invalid setting will enable the oscillator.|RW|-|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0xd1e→DISABLE|||
||0xfab→ENABLE|||



2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**224**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|11:0|**FREQ_RANGE**: Controls the number of delay stages in the ROSC ring<br>LOW uses stages 0 to 7<br>MEDIUM uses stages 2 to 7<br>HIGH uses stages 4 to 7<br>TOOHIGH uses stages 6 to 7 and should not be used because its frequency<br>exceeds design specifications<br>The clock output will not glitch when changing the range up one step at a time<br>The clock output will glitch when changing the range down<br>Note: the values here are gray coded which is why HIGH comes before<br>TOOHIGH|RW|0xaa0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0xfa4→LOW|||
||0xfa5→MEDIUM|||
||0xfa7→HIGH|||
||0xfa6→TOOHIGH|||



## **ROSC: FREQA Register**

## **Offset** : 0x04

## **Description**

The FREQA & FREQB registers control the frequency by controlling the drive strength of each stage The drive strength has 4 levels determined by the number of bits set

Increasing the number of bits set increases the drive strength and increases the oscillation frequency

- 0 bits set is the default drive strength

- 1 bit set doubles the drive strength

- 2 bits set triples drive strength

- 3 bits set quadruples drive strength

_Table 266. FREQA Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|**PASSWD**: Set to 0x9696 to apply the settings<br>Any other value in this field will set all drive strengths to 0|RW|0x0000|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x9696→PASS|||
|15|Reserved.|-|-|
|14:12|**DS3**: Stage 3 drive strength|RW|0x0|
|11|Reserved.|-|-|
|10:8|**DS2**: Stage 2 drive strength|RW|0x0|
|7|Reserved.|-|-|
|6:4|**DS1**: Stage 1 drive strength|RW|0x0|
|3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2:0|**DS0**: Stage 0 drive strength|RW|0x0|



## **ROSC: FREQB Register**

**Offset** : 0x08

2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**225**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

For a detailed description see freqa register

_Table 267. FREQB Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|**PASSWD**: Set to 0x9696 to apply the settings<br>Any other value in this field will set all drive strengths to 0|RW|0x0000|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x9696→PASS|||
|15|Reserved.|-|-|
|14:12|**DS7**: Stage 7 drive strength|RW|0x0|
|11|Reserved.|-|-|
|10:8|**DS6**: Stage 6 drive strength|RW|0x0|
|7|Reserved.|-|-|
|6:4|**DS5**: Stage 5 drive strength|RW|0x0|
|3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2:0|**DS4**: Stage 4 drive strength|RW|0x0|



## **ROSC: DORMANT Register**

**Offset** : 0x0c

## **Description**

Ring Oscillator pause control

_Table 268. DORMANT Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:0|This is used to save power by pausing the ROSC<br>On power-up this field is initialised to WAKE<br>An invalid write will also select WAKE<br>Warning: setup the irq before selecting dormant mode|RW|-|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x636f6d61→DORMANT|||
||0x77616b65→WAKE|||



## **ROSC: DIV Register**

**Offset** : 0x10

## **Description**

Controls the output divider

_Table 269. DIV Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11:0|set to 0xaa0 + div where<br>div = 0 divides by 32<br>div = 1-31 divides by div<br>any other value sets div=31<br>this register resets to div=16|RW|-|
||Enumerated values:|||



2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**226**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0xaa0→PASS|||



## **ROSC: PHASE Register**

**Offset** : 0x14

## **Description**

Controls the phase shifted output

_Table 270. PHASE Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11:4|**PASSWD**: set to 0xaa<br>any other value enables the output with shift=0|RW|0x00|
|3|**ENABLE**: enable the phase-shifted output<br>this can be changed on-the-fly|RW|0x1|
|2|**FLIP**: invert the phase-shifted output<br>this is ignored when div=1|RW|0x0|
|1:0|**SHIFT**: phase shift the phase-shifted output by SHIFT input clocks<br>this can be changed on-the-fly<br>must be set to 0 before setting div=1|RW|0x0|



## **ROSC: STATUS Register**

**Offset** : 0x18

## **Description**

Ring Oscillator Status

|_Table 271. STATUS_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**STABLE**: Oscillator is running and stable|RO|0x0|
||30:25|Reserved.|-|-|
||24|**BADWRITE**: An invalid value has been written to CTRL_ENABLE or<br>CTRL_FREQ_RANGE or FREQA or FREQB or DIV or PHASE or DORMANT|WC|0x0|
||23:17|Reserved.|-|-|
||16|**DIV_RUNNING**: post-divider is running<br>this resets to 0 but transitions to 1 during chip startup|RO|-|
||15:13|Reserved.|-|-|
||12|**ENABLED**: Oscillator is enabled but not necessarily running and stable<br>this resets to 0 but transitions to 1 during chip startup|RO|-|
||11:0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **ROSC: RANDOMBIT Register**

**Offset** : 0x1c

|_Table 272._<br>_RANDOMBIT Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|



2.17. Ring Oscillator (ROSC)

**227**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|This just reads the state of the oscillator output so randomness is<br>compromised if the ring oscillator is stopped or run at a harmonic of the bus<br>frequency|RO|0x1|



## **ROSC: COUNT Register**

## **Offset** : 0x20

_Table 273. COUNT Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:0|A down counter running at the ROSC frequency which counts to zero and<br>stops.<br>To start the counter write a non-zero value.<br>Can be used for short software pauses when setting up time sensitive<br>hardware.|RW|0x00|
