## **2.18. PLL**

## **2.18.1. Overview**

The PLL is designed to take a reference clock, and multiply it using a VCO (Voltage Controlled Oscillator) with a feedback loop. The VCO must run at high frequencies (between 750 and 1600MHz), so there are two dividers, known as post dividers that can divide the VCO frequency before it is distributed to the clock generators on the chip.

There are two PLLs in RP2040. They are:

- [pll_sys][ - Used to generate up to a 133MHz system clock]

- [pll_usb][ - Used to generate a 48MHz USB reference clock]

**==> picture [329 x 157] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 35. On both<br>PLLs, the FREF LOCK<br>(reference) input is Lock Detect FOUTVCO<br>connected to the FREF<br>crystal oscillator’s XI FOUTPOSTDIV<br>input. The PLL ÷1-63 PFD VCO ÷1-7 ÷1-7<br>contains a VCO, which<br>is locked to a constant REFDIV 6'b 3'b 3'b BYPASS<br>ratio of the reference FBDIV 12'b Feedback Divide POSTDIV1 POSTDIV2<br>clock via the feedback ÷16-320<br>loop (phase-frequency CLKSSCG<br>detector and loop<br>filter). This can<br>Analog circuits<br>synthesise very high Post divider rate circuits<br>frequencies, which Reference rate circuits<br>may be divided down<br>by the post-dividers.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **2.18.2. Calculating PLL parameters**

To configure the PLL, you must know the frequency of the reference clock, which on RP2040 is routed directly from the crystal oscillator. This will often be a 12MHz crystal, for compatibility with RP2040’s USB bootrom. The PLL’s final output frequency FOUTPOSTDIV can then be calculated as (FREF / REFDIV) × FBDIV / (POSTDIV1 × POSTDIV2). With a desired output frequency in mind, you must select PLL parameters according to the following constraints of the PLL design:

- [Minimum reference frequency (][FREF][ / ][REFDIV][) is 5MHz]

2.18. PLL

**228**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Oscillator frequency (][FOUTVCO][) must be in the range 750MHz ][→][ 1600MHz]

- [Feedback divider (][FBDIV][) must be in the range 16 ][→][ 320]

- [The post dividers ][POSTDIV1][ and ][POSTDIV2][ must be in the range 1 ][→][ 7]

- [Maximum input frequency (][FREF][ / ][REFDIV][) is VCO frequency divided by 16, due to minimum feedback divisor]

Additionally, the maximum frequencies of the chip’s clock generators (attached to FOUTPOSTDIV) must be respected. For the system PLL this is 133MHz, and for the USB PLL, 48MHz.

##  **NOTE**

The crystal oscillator on RP2040 is designed for crystals between 5 and 15MHz, so typically REFDIV should be 1. If the application circuit drives a faster reference directly into the XI input, and a low VCO frequency is desired, the reference divisor can be increased to keep the PLL input within a suitable range.

##  **TIP**

When two different values are required for POSTDIV1 and POSTDIV2, it’s preferable to assign the higher value to POSTDIV1, for lower power consumption.

In the RP2040 reference design (see the Minimal Design Example in Hardware design with RP2040), which attaches a 12MHz crystal to the crystal oscillator, this implies that the minimum achievable and legal VCO frequency is 12MHz × 63 = 756MHz, and the maximum VCO is 12MHz × 133 = 1596MHz, so FBDIV must remain in the range 63 → 133. For example, setting FBDIV to 100 would synthesise a 1200MHz VCO frequency. A POSTDIV1 value of 6 and a POSTDIV2 value of 2 would divide this by 12 in total, producing a clean 100MHz at the PLL’s final output.

## **2.18.2.1. Jitter vs Power Consumption**

There are often several sets of PLL configuration parameters which achieve, or are very close to, the desired output frequency. It is up to the programmer to decide whether to prioritise low PLL power consumption, or lower _jitter_ , which is cycle-to-cycle variation in the PLL’s output clock period. This is not a concern as far as system stability is concerned, because RP2040’s digital logic is designed with margin for the worst-case possible jitter on the system clock, but a highly accurate clock is often needed for audio and video applications, or where data is being transmitted and received in accordance with a specification. For example, the USB specification defines a maximum amount of allowable jitter.

Jitter is minimised by running the VCO at the highest possible frequency, so that higher post-divide values can be used. For example, 1500MHz VCO / 6 / 2 = 125MHz. To reduce power consumption, the VCO frequency should be as low as possible. For example: 750MHz VCO / 6 / 1 = 125MHz.

Another consideration here is that slightly adjusting the output frequency may allow a much lower VCO frequency to be achieved, by bringing the output to a closer rational multiple of the input. Indeed the exact desired frequency may not be exactly achievable with any allowable VCO frequency, or combination of divisors.

SDK provides a Python script that searches for the best VCO and post divider options for a desired output frequency:

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_clocks/scripts/vcocalc.py_

1 _#!/usr/bin/env python3_ 2 3 import argparse 4 import sys 5 6 _# Fixed hardware parameters_ 7 fbdiv_range = range(16, 320 + 1) 8 postdiv_range = range(1, 7 + 1) 9 ref_min = 5 10 refdiv_min = 1 11 refdiv_max = 63

2.18. PLL

**229**

RP2040 Datasheet

12 13 def validRefdiv(string): 14     if ((int(string) < refdiv_min) or (int(string) > refdiv_max)): 15         raise ValueError("REFDIV must be in the range {} to {}".format(refdiv_min, refdiv_max)) 16     return int(string) 17 18 parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description="PLL parameter calculator") 19 parser.add_argument("--input", "-i", default=12, help="Input (reference) frequency. Default 12 MHz", type=float) 20 parser.add_argument("--ref-min", default=5, help="Override minimum reference frequency. Default 5 MHz", type=float) 21 parser.add_argument("--vco-max", default=1600, help="Override maximum VCO frequency. Default 1600 MHz", type=float) 22 parser.add_argument("--vco-min", default=750, help="Override minimum VCO frequency. Default 750 MHz", type=float) 23 parser.add_argument("--cmake", action="store_true", help="Print out a CMake snippet to apply the selected PLL parameters to your program") 24 parser.add_argument("--cmake-only", action="store_true", help="Same as --cmake, but do not print anything other than the CMake output") 25 parser.add_argument("--cmake-executable-name", default="<program>", help="Set the executable name to use in the generated CMake output") 26 parser.add_argument("--lock-refdiv", help="Lock REFDIV to specified number in the range {} to {}".format(refdiv_min, refdiv_max), type=validRefdiv) 27 parser.add_argument("--low-vco", "-l", action="store_true", help="Use a lower VCO frequency when possible. This reduces power consumption, at the cost of increased jitter") 28 parser.add_argument("output", help="Output frequency in MHz.", type=float) 29 args = parser.parse_args() 30 31 refdiv_range = range(refdiv_min, max(refdiv_min, min(refdiv_max, int(args.input / args .ref_min))) + 1) 32 if args.lock_refdiv: 33     print("Locking REFDIV to", args.lock_refdiv) 34     refdiv_range = [args.lock_refdiv] 35 36 best = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) 37 best_margin = args.output 38 39 for refdiv in refdiv_range: 40     for fbdiv in fbdiv_range: 41         vco = args.input / refdiv * fbdiv 42         if vco < args.vco_min or vco > args.vco_max: 43             continue 44 _# pd1 is inner loop so that we prefer higher ratios of pd1:pd2_ 45         for pd2 in postdiv_range: 46             for pd1 in postdiv_range: 47                 out = vco / pd1 / pd2 48                 margin = abs(out - args.output) 49                 vco_is_better = vco < best[5] if args.low_vco else vco > best[5] 50                 if ((vco * 1000) % (pd1 * pd2)): 51                     continue 52                 if margin < best_margin or (abs(margin - best_margin) < 1e-9 and vco_is_better): 53                     best = (out, fbdiv, pd1, pd2, refdiv, vco) 54                     best_margin = margin 55 56 best_out, best_fbdiv, best_pd1, best_pd2, best_refdiv, best_vco = best 57 58 if best[0] > 0: 59     cmake_output = \ 60 f"""target_compile_definitions({args.cmake_executable_name} PRIVATE 61     PLL_SYS_REFDIV={best_refdiv} 62     PLL_SYS_VCO_FREQ_HZ={int((args.input * 1_000_000) / best_refdiv * best_fbdiv)} 63     PLL_SYS_POSTDIV1={best_pd1}

2.18. PLL

**230**

RP2040 Datasheet

64     PLL_SYS_POSTDIV2={best_pd2} 65     SYS_CLK_HZ={int((args.input * 1_000_000) / (best_refdiv * best_pd1 * best_pd2) * best_fbdiv)} 66 ) 67 """ 68     if not args.cmake_only: 69         print("Requested: {} MHz".format(args.output)) 70         print("Achieved:  {} MHz".format(best_out)) 71         print("REFDIV:    {}".format(best_refdiv)) 72         print("FBDIV:     {} (VCO = {} MHz)".format(best_fbdiv, args.input / best_refdiv * best_fbdiv)) 73         print("PD1:       {}".format(best_pd1)) 74         print("PD2:       {}".format(best_pd2)) 75         if best_refdiv != 1: 76             print( 77                 "\nThis requires a non-default REFDIV value.\n" 78                 "Add the following to your CMakeLists.txt to apply the REFDIV:\n" 79             ) 80         elif args.cmake or args.cmake_only: 81             print("") 82     if args.cmake or args.cmake_only or best_refdiv != 1: 83         print(cmake_output) 84 else: 85     sys.exit("No solution found")

Given an input and output frequency, this script will find the best possible set of PLL parameters to get as close as possible. Where multiple equally good combinations are found, it returns the parameters which yield the highest VCO frequency, for best output stability. The -l or --low-vco flag will instead prefer lower frequencies, for reduced power consumption.

Here a 48MHz output is requested:

$ ./vcocalc.py 48 Requested: 48.0 MHz Achieved: 48.0 MHz FBDIV: 120 (VCO = 1440 MHz) PD1: 6 PD2: 5

Asking for a 48MHz output with a lower VCO frequency, if possible:

$ ./vcocalc.py -l 48 Requested: 48.0 MHz Achieved: 48.0 MHz FBDIV: 64 (VCO = 768 MHz) PD1: 4 PD2: 4

For a 125MHz system clock with a 12MHz input, the minimum VCO frequency is quite high.

$ ./vcocalc.py -l 125 Requested: 125.0 MHz Achieved: 125.0 MHz FBDIV: 125 (VCO = 1500 MHz) PD1: 6

2.18. PLL

**231**

RP2040 Datasheet

PD2: 2

We can restrict the search to lower VCO frequencies, so that the script will consider looser frequency matches. Note that, whilst a 750MHz VCO would be ideal here, we can’t achieve exactly 750MHz by multiplying the 12MHz input by an integer, which is why the previous invocation returned such a high VCO frequency.

$ ./vcocalc.py -l 125 --vco-max 800 Requested: 125.0 MHz Achieved: 126.0 MHz FBDIV: 63 (VCO = 756 MHz) PD1: 6 PD2: 1

A 126MHz system clock may be a tolerable deviation from the desired 125MHz, and generating this clock consumes less power at the PLL.

## **2.18.3. Configuration**

The SDK uses the following PLL settings:

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_clocks/include/hardware/clocks.h Lines 143 - 164_

143 _// There are two PLLs in RP-series microcontrollers:_ 144 _// 1. The 'SYS PLL' generates the system clock, the frequency is defined by `SYS_CLK_KHZ`._ 145 _// 2. The 'USB PLL' generates the USB clock, the frequency is defined by `USB_CLK_KHZ`._ 146 _//_ 147 _// The two PLLs use the crystal oscillator output directly as their reference frequency input; the PLLs reference_ 148 _// frequency cannot be reduced by the dividers present in the clocks block. The crystal frequency is defined by `XOSC_HZ` (or_ 149 _// `XOSC_KHZ` or `XOSC_MHZ`)._ 150 _//_ 151 _// The system's default definitions are correct for the above frequencies with a 12MHz_ 152 _// crystal frequency.  If different frequencies are required, these must be defined in_ 153 _// the board configuration file together with the revised PLL settings_ 154 _// Use `vcocalc.py` to check and calculate new PLL settings if you change any of these frequencies._ 155 _//_ 156 _// Default PLL configuration RP2040:_ 157 _//                   REF     FBDIV VCO            POSTDIV_ 158 _// PLL SYS: 12 / 1 = 12MHz * 125 = 1500MHz / 6 / 2 = 125MHz_ 159 _// PLL USB: 12 / 1 = 12MHz * 100 = 1200MHz / 5 / 5 =  48MHz_ 160 _//_ 161 _// Default PLL configuration RP2350:_ 162 _//                   REF     FBDIV VCO            POSTDIV_ 163 _// PLL SYS: 12 / 1 = 12MHz * 125 = 1500MHz / 5 / 2 = 150MHz_ 164 _// PLL USB: 12 / 1 = 12MHz * 100 = 1200MHz / 5 / 5 =  48MHz_

The pll_init function in the SDK, which we will examine below, asserts that all of these conditions are true before attempting to configure the PLL.

The SDK defines the PLL control registers as a struct. It then maps them into memory for each instance of the PLL.

2.18. PLL

**232**

RP2040 Datasheet

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2040/hardware_structs/include/hardware/structs/pll.h Lines 27 - 53_

27 typedef struct { 28     _REG_(PLL_CS_OFFSET) _// PLL_CS_ 29 _// Control and Status_ 30 _// 0x80000000 [31]    LOCK         (0) PLL is locked_ 31 _// 0x00000100 [8]     BYPASS       (0) Passes the reference clock to the output instead of the..._ 32 _// 0x0000003f [5:0]   REFDIV       (0x01) Divides the PLL input reference clock_ 33     io_rw_32 cs; 34 35     _REG_(PLL_PWR_OFFSET) _// PLL_PWR_ 36 _// Controls the PLL power modes_ 37 _// 0x00000020 [5]     VCOPD        (1) PLL VCO powerdown +_ 38 _// 0x00000008 [3]     POSTDIVPD    (1) PLL post divider powerdown +_ 39 _// 0x00000004 [2]     DSMPD        (1) PLL DSM powerdown +_ 40 _// 0x00000001 [0]     PD           (1) PLL powerdown +_ 41     io_rw_32 pwr; 42 43     _REG_(PLL_FBDIV_INT_OFFSET) _// PLL_FBDIV_INT_ 44 _// Feedback divisor_ 45 _// 0x00000fff [11:0]  FBDIV_INT    (0x000) see ctrl reg description for constraints_ 46     io_rw_32 fbdiv_int; 47 48     _REG_(PLL_PRIM_OFFSET) _// PLL_PRIM_ 49 _// Controls the PLL post dividers for the primary output_ 50 _// 0x00070000 [18:16] POSTDIV1     (0x7) divide by 1-7_ 51 _// 0x00007000 [14:12] POSTDIV2     (0x7) divide by 1-7_ 52     io_rw_32 prim; 53 } pll_hw_t;

The SDK defines pll_init which is used to configure, or reconfigure a PLL. It starts by clearing any previous power state in the PLL, then calculates the appropriate feedback divider value. There are assertions to check these values satisfy the constraints above.

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_pll/pll.c Lines 13 - 21_

13 void pll_init(PLL pll, uint refdiv, uint vco_freq, uint post_div1, uint post_div2) { 14     uint32_t ref_freq = XOSC_HZ / refdiv; 15 16 _// Check vco freq is in an acceptable range_ 17     assert(vco_freq >= PICO_PLL_VCO_MIN_FREQ_HZ && vco_freq <= PICO_PLL_VCO_MAX_FREQ_HZ); 18 19 _// What are we multiplying the reference clock by to get the vco freq_ 20 _// (The regs are called div, because you divide the vco output and compare it to the refclk)_ 21     uint32_t fbdiv = vco_freq / ref_freq;

The programming sequence for the PLL is as follows:

- [Program the reference clock divider (is a divide by 1 in the RP2040 case)]

- [Program the feedback divider]

- [Turn on the main power and VCO]

- [Wait for the VCO to lock (i.e. keep its output frequency stable)]

- [Set up post dividers and turn them on]

2.18. PLL

**233**

RP2040 Datasheet

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_pll/pll.c Lines 42 - 69_

42     if ((pll->cs & PLL_CS_LOCK_BITS) && 43         (refdiv == (pll->cs & PLL_CS_REFDIV_BITS)) && 44         (fbdiv  == (pll->fbdiv_int & PLL_FBDIV_INT_BITS)) && 45         (pdiv   == (pll->prim & (PLL_PRIM_POSTDIV1_BITS | PLL_PRIM_POSTDIV2_BITS)))) { 46 _// do not disrupt PLL that is already correctly configured and operating_ 47         return; 48     } 49 50     reset_unreset_block_num_wait_blocking(PLL_RESET_NUM(pll)); 51 52 _// Load VCO-related dividers before starting VCO_ 53     pll->cs = refdiv; 54     pll->fbdiv_int = fbdiv; 55 56 _// Turn on PLL_ 57     uint32_t power = PLL_PWR_PD_BITS | _// Main power_ 58                      PLL_PWR_VCOPD_BITS; _// VCO Power_ 59 60     hw_clear_bits(&pll->pwr, power); 61 62 _// Wait for PLL to lock_ 63     while (!(pll->cs & PLL_CS_LOCK_BITS)) tight_loop_contents(); 64 65 _// Set up post dividers_ 66     pll->prim = pdiv; 67 68 _// Turn on post divider_ 69     hw_clear_bits(&pll->pwr, PLL_PWR_POSTDIVPD_BITS);

Note the VCO is turned on first, followed by the post dividers so the PLL does not output a dirty clock while the VCO is locking.

## **2.18.4. List of Registers**

The PLL_SYS and PLL_USB registers start at base addresses of 0x40028000 and 0x4002c000 respectively (defined as PLL_SYS_BASE and PLL_USB_BASE in SDK).

_Table 274. List of PLL registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x0|CS|Control and Status|
|0x4|PWR|Controls the PLL power modes.|
|0x8|FBDIV_INT|Feedback divisor|
|0xc|PRIM|Controls the PLL post dividers for the primary output|



## **PLL: CS Register**

**Offset** : 0x0

## **Description**

Control and Status GENERAL CONSTRAINTS: Reference clock frequency min=5MHz, max=800MHz Feedback divider min=16, max=320 VCO frequency min=750MHz, max=1600MHz

2.18. PLL

**234**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 275. CS Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31|**LOCK**: PLL is locked|RO|0x0|
|30:9|Reserved.|-|-|
|8|**BYPASS**: Passes the reference clock to the output instead of the divided VCO.<br>The VCO continues to run so the user can switch between the reference clock<br>and the divided VCO but the output will glitch when doing so.|RW|0x0|
|7:6|Reserved.|-|-|
|5:0|**REFDIV**: Divides the PLL input reference clock.<br>Behaviour is undefined for div=0.<br>PLL output will be unpredictable during refdiv changes, wait for lock=1 before<br>using it.|RW|0x01|



## **PLL: PWR Register**

**Offset** : 0x4

## **Description**

Controls the PLL power modes.

_Table 276. PWR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
|5|**VCOPD**: PLL VCO powerdown<br>To save power set high when PLL output not required or bypass=1.|RW|0x1|
|4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3|**POSTDIVPD**: PLL post divider powerdown<br>To save power set high when PLL output not required or bypass=1.|RW|0x1|
|2|**DSMPD**: PLL DSM powerdown<br>Nothing is achieved by setting this low.|RW|0x1|
|1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**PD**: PLL powerdown<br>To save power set high when PLL output not required.|RW|0x1|



## **PLL: FBDIV_INT Register**

**Offset** : 0x8

## **Description**

Feedback divisor

(note: this PLL does not support fractional division)

_Table 277. FBDIV_INT Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11:0|see ctrl reg description for constraints|RW|0x000|



## **PLL: PRIM Register**

**Offset** : 0xc

## **Description**

Controls the PLL post dividers for the primary output

2.18. PLL

**235**

RP2040 Datasheet

(note: this PLL does not have a secondary output)

the primary output is driven from VCO divided by postdiv1*postdiv2

_Table 278. PRIM Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:19|Reserved.|-|-|
|18:16|**POSTDIV1**: divide by 1-7|RW|0x7|
|15|Reserved.|-|-|
|14:12|**POSTDIV2**: divide by 1-7|RW|0x7|
|11:0|Reserved.|-|-|
