## **4.1. USB**

## **4.1.1. Overview**

## **Prerequisite Knowledge Required**

This section requires knowledge of the USB protocol. We recommend USB Made Simple if you are unclear on the terminology used in this section.

RP2040 contains a USB 2.0 controller that can operate as either:

- [a Full Speed device (12Mbps)]

- [a host that can communicate with both Low Speed (1.5Mbps) and Full Speed devices. This includes multiple] downstream devices connected to a USB hub.

There is an integrated USB 1.1 PHY which interfaces the USB controller with the DP and DM pins of the chip.

## **4.1.1.1. Features**

The USB controller hardware handles the low level USB protocol, meaning the main job of the programmer is to configure the controller and then provide / consume data buffers in response to events on the bus. The controller interrupts the processor when it needs attention. The USB controller has 4kB of DPSRAM which is used for configuration and data buffers.

## **4.1.1.1.1. Device Mode**

- [USB 2.0-compatible Full Speed device (12Mbps)]

- [Supports up to 32 endpoints (Endpoints 0 ][→][ 15 in both in and out directions)]

- [Supports ][Control][, ][Isochronous][, ][Bulk][, and ][Interrupt][ endpoint types]

- [Supports double buffering]

- [3840 bytes of usable buffer space in DPSRAM. This is equivalent to 60 × 64-byte buffers.]

## **4.1.1.1.2. Host Mode**

- [Can communicate with Full Speed (12Mbps) devices and Low Speed devices (1.5Mbps)]

- [Can communicate with multiple devices via a USB hub, including Low Speed devices connected to a Full Speed] hub

- [Can poll up to 15 interrupt endpoints in hardware. (Interrupt endpoints are used by hubs to notify the host of] connect/disconnect events, mice to notify the host of movement etc.)

4.1. USB

**383**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.1.2. Architecture**

## **4.1.2.1. Clock speed**

This controller requires clk_usb to be running at 48MHz.

##  **NOTE**

clk_sys must also be running at > 48MHz. See RP2040-E16.

## **4.1.2.2. Overview**

_Figure 57. A simplified overview of the USB controller architecture._

**==> picture [425 x 175] intentionally omitted <==**

The USB controller is an area efficient design that muxes a device controller or host controller onto a common set of components. Each component is detailed below.

## **4.1.2.3. USB PHY**

The USB PHY provides the electrical interface between the USB DP and DM pins and the digital logic of the controller. The DP and DM pins are a differential pair, meaning the values are always the inverse of each other, except to encode a specific line state (SE0, etc). The USB PHY drives the DP and DM pins to transmit data, as well as performing a differential receive of any incoming data. The USB PHY provides both single-ended and differential receive data to the line state detection module.

The USB PHY has built in pull-up and pull-down resistors. If the controller is acting as a Full Speed device then the DP pin is pulled up to indicate to the host that a Full Speed device has been connected. In host mode, a weak pull down is applied to DP and DM so that the lines are pulled to a logical zero until the device pulls up DP for Full Speed or DM for Low Speed.

## **4.1.2.4. Line state detection**

The [2] defines several line states (Bus Reset, Connected, Suspend, Resume, Data 1, Data 0, etc) that need to be detected. The line state detection module has several state machines to detect these states and signal events to the other hardware components. There is no shared clock signal in USB, so the RX data must be sampled by an internal clock. The maximum data rate of USB Full Speed is 12Mbps. The RX data is sampled at 48MHz, giving 4 clock cycles to capture and filter the bus state. The line state detection module distributes the filtered RX data to the Serial RX Engine.

4.1. USB

**384**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.1.2.5. Serial RX Engine**

The serial receive engine decodes receive data captured by the line state detection module. It produces the following information:

- [The ][PID][ of the incoming data packet]

- [The device address for the incoming data]

- [The device endpoint for the incoming data]

- [Data bytes]

The serial receive engine also detects errors in RX data by performing a CRC check on the incoming data. Any errors are signalled to the other hardware blocks and can raise an interrupt.

##  **NOTE**

If you disconnect the USB cable during a packet in either host or device mode you will see errors raised by the hardware. Your software will need to take this scenario into account if you enable error interrupts.

## **4.1.2.6. Serial TX Engine**

The serial transmit engine is a mirror of the serial receive engine. It is connected to the currently active controller (either device or host). It creates TOKEN and DATA packets, including calculating the CRC, and transmits them on the bus.

## **4.1.2.7. DPSRAM**

The USB controller has 4kB (4096 bytes) of DPSRAM (Dual Port SRAM). The DPSRAM is used to store control registers and data buffers. The DPSRAM is accessible as a 32-bit wide memory at address 0 of the USB controller (0x50100000).

The DPSRAM has the following characteristics, which are different to most registers on RP2040:

- [Supports 8/16/32-bit accesses. Registers typically support 32-bit accesses only]

- [The DPSRAM does not support set / clear aliases. RP2040 registers typically support these]

Data Buffers are typically 64 bytes long as this is the max normal packet size for most FS packets. For Isochronous endpoints a maximum buffer size of 1023 bytes is supported. For other packet types the maximum size is 64 bytes per buffer.

## **4.1.2.7.1. Concurrent access**

The DPSRAM in the USB controller should be considered asynchronous and not atomic. It is a dual port SRAM which means the processor has a port to read/write the memory and the USB controller also has a port to read/write the memory. This means that both the processor and the USB controller can access the same memory address at the same time. One could be writing and one could be reading. It is possible to get inconsistent data if the controller is reading the memory while the processor is writing the memory. Care must be taken to avoid this scenario.

The AVAILABLE bit in the buffer control register is used to indicate who has ownership of a buffer. This bit should be set to 1 by the processor to give the controller ownership of the buffer. The controller will set the bit back to 0 when it has used the buffer. The AVAILABLE bit should be set separately to the rest of the data in the buffer control register, so that the rest of the data in the buffer control register is accurate when the AVAILABLE bit is set.

This is necessary because the processor clock clk_sys can be running several times faster than the clk_usb clock. Therefore clk_sys can update the data **during** a read by the USB controller on a slower clock. The correct process is:

- [Write buffer information (length, etc.) to buffer control register]

4.1. USB

**385**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [nop][ for some ][clk_sys][ cycles to ensure that at least one ][clk_usb][ cycle has passed. For example if ][clk_sys][ was running] at 125MHz and clk_usb was running at 48MHz then 125/48 rounded up would be 3 nop instructions

- [Set ][AVAILABLE][ bit]

If clk_sys and clk_usb are running at the same frequency then it is not necessary to set the AVAILABLE bit separately.

##  **NOTE**

When the controller is writing status back to the DPSRAM it does a 16 bit write to the lower 2 bytes for buffer 0 and the upper 2 bytes for buffer 1. Therefore, if using double buffered mode, it is safest to treat the buffer control register as two 16 bit registers when updating it in software.

## **4.1.2.7.2. Layout**

Addresses 0x0-0xff are used for control registers containing configuration data. The remaining space, addresses 0x1000xfff (3840 bytes) can be used for data buffers. The controller has control registers that start at address 0x10000.

The memory layout is different depending on if the controller is in Device or Host mode. In device mode, there are multiple endpoints a host can access so there must be endpoint control and buffer control registers for each endpoint. In host mode, the host software running on the processor is deciding which endpoints and which devices to access, so there only needs to be one set of endpoint control and buffer control registers. As well as software driven transfers, the host controller can poll up to 15 interrupt endpoints and has a register for each of these interrupt endpoints.

_Table 394. DPSRAM layout_

|**Offset**|**Device Function**|**Host Function**|
|---|---|---|
|0x0|Setup packet (8 bytes)||
|0x8|EP1 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 1|
|0xc|EP1 out control|Spare|
|0x10|EP2 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 2|
|0x14|EP2 out control|Spare|
|0x18|EP3 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 3|
|0x1c|EP3 out control|Spare|
|0x20|EP4 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 4|
|0x24|EP4 out control|Spare|
|0x28|EP5 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 5|
|0x2c|EP5 out control|Spare|
|0x30|EP6 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 6|
|0x34|EP6 out control|Spare|
|0x38|EP7 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 7|
|0x3c|EP7 out control|Spare|
|0x40|EP8 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 8|
|0x44|EP8 out control|Spare|
|0x48|EP9 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 9|
|0x4c|EP9 out control|Spare|
|0x50|EP10 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 10|
|0x54|EP10 out control|Spare|



4.1. USB

**386**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Device Function**|**Host Function**|
|---|---|---|
|0x58|EP11 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 11|
|0x5c|EP11 out control|Spare|
|0x60|EP12 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 12|
|0x64|EP12 out control|Spare|
|0x68|EP13 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 13|
|0x6c|EP13 out control|Spare|
|0x70|EP14 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 14|
|0x74|EP14 out control|Spare|
|0x78|EP15 in control|Interrupt endpoint control 15|
|0x7c|EP15 out control|Spare|
|0x80|EP0 in buffer control|EPx buffer control|
|0x84|EP0 out buffer control|Spare|
|0x88|EP1 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 1|
|0x8c|EP1 out buffer control|Spare|
|0x90|EP2 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 2|
|0x94|EP2 out buffer control|Spare|
|0x98|EP3 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 3|
|0x9c|EP3 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xa0|EP4 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 4|
|0xa4|EP4 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xa8|EP5 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 5|
|0xac|EP5 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xb0|EP6 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 6|
|0xb4|EP6 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xb8|EP7 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 7|
|0xbc|EP7 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xc0|EP8 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 8|
|0xc4|EP8 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xc8|EP9 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 9|
|0xcc|EP9 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xd0|EP10 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 10|
|0xd4|EP10 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xd8|EP11 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 11|
|0xdc|EP11 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xe0|EP12 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 12|
|0xe4|EP12 out buffer control|Spare|



4.1. USB

**387**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Device Function**|**Host Function**|
|---|---|---|
|0xe8|EP13 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 13|
|0xec|EP13 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xf0|EP14 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 14|
|0xf4|EP14 out buffer control|Spare|
|0xf8|EP15 in buffer control|Interrupt endpoint buffer control 15|
|0xfc|EP15 out buffer control|Spare|
|0x100|EP0 buffer 0 (shared between in and<br>out)|EPx control|
|0x140|Optional EP0 buffer 1|Spare|
|0x180|Data buffers||



## **4.1.2.7.3. Endpoint control register**

The endpoint control register is used to configure an endpoint. It contains:

- [The endpoint type]

- [The base address of its data buffer, or data buffers if double buffered]

- [Interrupts events on the endpoint should trigger]

A device must support Endpoint 0 so that it can reply to SETUP packets and be enumerated. As a result, there is no endpoint control register for EP0. Its buffers begin at 0x100. All other endpoints can have either single or dual buffers and are mapped at the base address programmed. As EP0 has no endpoint control register, the interrupt enable controls for EP0 come from SIE_CTRL.

_Table 395. Endpoint control register layout_

|**Bit(s)**|**Device Function**|**Host Function**|
|---|---|---|
|31|Endpoint Enable||
|30|Single buffered (64 bytes) = 0, Double buffered (64 bytes x 2) = 1||
|29|Enable Interrupt for every transferred buffer||
|28|Enable Interrupt for every 2 transferred buffers (valid for double buffered only)||
|27:26|Endpoint Type: Control = 0, ISO = 1, Bulk = 2, Interrupt = 3||
|25:18|N/A|The interval the host controller should poll this<br>|
|17|Interrupt on Stall|endpoint. Only applicable for interrupt<br>endpoints. Specified in ms - 1. For example: a|
|16|Interrupt on NAK|<br>value of 9 would poll the endpoint every 10ms.|
|15:6|Address base offset in DPSRAM of data buffer(s)||



##  **NOTE**

The data buffer base address must be 64-byte aligned as bits 0-5 are ignored

## **4.1.2.7.4. Buffer control register**

The buffer control register contains information about the state of the data buffers for that endpoint. It is shared between the processor and the controller. If the endpoint is configured to be single buffered, only the first half (bits 0- 15) of the buffer are used.

4.1. USB

**388**

RP2040 Datasheet

If double buffering, the buffer select starts at buffer 0. From then on, the buffer select flips between buffer 0 and 1 unless the "reset buffer select" bit is set (which resets the buffer select to buffer 0). The value of the buffer select is internal to the controller and not accessible by the processor.

For host interrupt and isochronous packets on EPx, the buffer full bit will be set on completion even if the transfer was unsuccessful. The error bits in the SIE_STATUS register can be read to determine the error.

|_Table 396. Buffer_<br>_control register layout_|**Bit(s)**|**Function**|
|---|---|---|
||31|Buffer 1 full. Should be set to 1 by the processor for anINtransaction and 0 for anOUT<br>transaction. The controller sets this to 1 for anOUTtransaction because it has filled the buffer.<br>The controller sets it to 0 for anINtransaction because it has emptied the buffer. Only valid for<br>double buffered|
||30|Last buffer of transfer for buffer 1 - only valid for double buffered|
||29|Data PID for buffer 1 - DATA0 = 0, DATA1 = 1 - only valid for double buffered|
||27:28|Double buffer offset for Isochronous mode (0 = 128, 1 = 256, 2 = 512, 3 = 1024)|
||26|Buffer 1 available. Whether the buffer can be used by the controller for a transfer. The<br>processor sets this to 1 when the buffer is configured. The controller sets to 0 when it has<br>used the buffer. i.e. has sent the data to the host for anINtransaction or has filled the buffer<br>with data from the host for anOUTtransaction. Only valid for double buffered.|
||25:16|Buffer 1 transfer length - only valid for double buffered|
||15|Buffer 0 full. Should be set to 1 by the processor for anINtransaction and 0 for anOUT<br>transaction. The controller sets this to 1 for anOUTtransaction because it has filled the buffer.<br>The controller sets it to 0 for anINtransaction because it has emptied the buffer.|
||14|Last buffer of transfer for buffer 0|
||13|Data PID for buffer 0 - DATA0 = 0, DATA1 = 1|
||12|Reset buffer select to buffer 0 - cleared at end of transfer. For DEVICE ONLY|
||11|Send STALL for device, STALL received for host|
||10|Buffer 0 available. Whether the buffer can be used by the controller for a transfer. The<br>processor sets this to 1 when the buffer is configured. The controller sets to 0 when it has<br>used the buffer. i.e. has sent the data to the host for anINtransaction or has filled the buffer<br>with data from the host for anOUTtransaction.|
||9:0|Buffer 0 transfer length|



##  **WARNING**

If running clk_sys and clk_usb at different speeds, the available and stall bits should be set after the other data in the buffer control register. Otherwise the controller may initiate a transaction with data from a previous packet. That is to say, the controller could see the available bit set but get the data pid or length from the previous packet.

## **4.1.2.8. Device Controller**

This section details how the device controller operates when it receives various packet types from the host.

## **4.1.2.8.1. SETUP**

The device controller **MUST** always accept a setup packet from the host. That is why the first 8 bytes of the DPSRAM has dedicated space for the setup packet.

4.1. USB

**389**

RP2040 Datasheet

The [2] states that receiving a setup packet also clears any stall bits on EP0. For this reason, the stall bits for EP0 are gated with two bits in the EP_STALL_ARM register. These bits are cleared when a setup packet is received. This means that to send a stall on EP0, you have to set both the stall bit in the buffer control register, and the appropriate bit in EP_STALL_ARM.

Barring any errors, the setup packet will be put into the setup packet buffer at DPSRAM offset 0x0. The device controller will then reply with an ACK.

Finally, SIE_STATUS.SETUP_REC is set to indicate that a setup packet has been received. This will trigger an interrupt if the programmer has enabled the SETUP_REC interrupt (see INTE).

## **4.1.2.8.2. IN**

From the device’s point of view, an IN transfer means transferring data **INTO** the host. When an IN token is received from the host the request is handled as follows:

TOKEN phase:

- [If ][STALL][ is set in the buffer control register (and if EP0, the appropriate ][EP_STALL_ARM][ bit is set) then send a ][STALL] response and go back to idle.

- [If ][AVAILABLE][ and ][FULL][ bits are set in buffer control move to the phase]

- [Otherwise send ][NAK][ unless this is an Isochronous endpoint, in which case go to idle.]

DATA phase:

- [Send DATA. If Isochronous go to idle. Otherwise move to ACK phase.]

ACK phase:

- [Wait for ][ACK][ packet from host. If there is a timeout then raise a timeout error. If ][ACK][ is received then the packet is] done, so move to status phase.

STATUS phase:

- [If this was the last buffer in the transfer (i.e. if the ][LAST_BUFFER][ bit in the buffer control register was set), set] SIE_STATUS.TRANS_COMPLETE.

- [If the endpoint is double buffered, flip the buffer select to the other buffer.]

- [Set a bit in ][BUFF_STATUS][ to indicate the buffer is done. When handling this event, the programmer should read] BUFF_CPU_SHOULD_HANDLE to see if it is buffer 0 or buffer 1 that is finished. If the endpoint is double buffered it is possible to have both buffers done. The cleared BUFF_STATUS bit will be set again, and BUFF_CPU_SHOULD_HANDLE will change in this instance.

- [Update status in the appropriate half of the buffer control register: length, pid, and last_buff are set. Everything else] is written to zero.

If a NAK gets sent to the host the host will retry again later.

## **4.1.2.8.3. OUT**

When an OUT token is received from the host, the request is handled as follows:

TOKEN phase:

- [Is the DATA pid what is specified in the buffer control register? If not raise ][SIE_STATUS][.DATA_SEQ_ERROR. (The] data pid for an Isochronous endpoint is not checked because Isochronous data is always sent with a DATA0 pid.)

- [Is the ][AVAILABLE][ bit set and the ][FULL][ bit unset. If so go to the data phase, unless the ][STALL][ bit is set in which case the] device controller will reply with a STALL.

DATA phase:

4.1. USB

**390**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Store received data in buffer. If Isochronous go to STATUS phase. Otherwise go to ACK phase.]

ACK phase:

- [Send ACK. Go to STATUS phase.]

STATUS phase:

See status phase from Section 4.1.2.8.2. The only difference is that the FULL bit is set in the buffer control register to indicate that data has been received whereas in the IN case the FULL bit is cleared to indicate that data has been sent.

## **4.1.2.8.4. Suspend and Resume**

The USB device controller supports both suspend and resume, as well as remote resume (triggered with SIE_CTRL.RESUME), where the device initiates the resume. There is an interrupt / status bit in SIE_STATUS. It is not necessary to enable the suspend and resume interrupts, as most devices do not need to care about suspend and resume.

The device goes into suspend when it does not see any start of frame packets (transmitted every 1ms) from the host.

##  **NOTE**

If you enable the suspend interrupt, it is likely you will see a suspend interrupt when the device is first connected but the bus is idle. The bus can be idle for a few ms before the host begins sending start of frame packets. You will also see a suspend interrupt when the device is disconnected if you do not have a VBUS detect circuit connected. This is because without VBUS detection, it is impossible to tell the difference between being disconnected and suspended.

## **4.1.2.8.5. Errata**

There are two hardware issues with the device controller, both of which have software workarounds on RP2040B0, RP2040B1, and are fixed in hardware on RP2040B2. See RP2040-E2 and RP2040-E5 for more information.

## **4.1.2.9. Host Controller**

The host controller design is similar to the device controller. All transactions are started by the host, so the host is always dealing with transactions it has started. For this reason there is only one set of endpoint control / endpoint buffer control registers. There is also additional hardware to poll interrupt endpoints in the background when there are no software controlled transactions taking place.

The host needs to send keep-alive packets to the device every 1ms to keep the device from suspending. In Full Speed mode this is done by sending a SOF (start of frame) packet. In Low Speed mode, an EOP (end of packet) is sent. When setting up the controller, SIE_CTRL.KEEP_ALIVE_EN and SIE_CTRL.SOF_EN should be set to enable these packets.

Several bits in SIE_CTRL are used to begin a host transaction:

- [SEND_SETUP][ - Send a setup packet. This is typically used in conjunction with ][RECEIVE_TRANS][ so the setup packet will be] sent followed by the additional data transaction expected from the device.

- [SEND_TRANS][ - This transfer is ][OUT][ from the host]

- [RECEIVE_TRANS][ - This transfer is ][IN][ to the host]

- [START_TRANS][ - Start the transfer - non-latching]

- [STOP_TRANS][ - Stop the current transfer - non-latching]

- [PREAMBLE_ENABLE][ - Use this to send a packet to a Low Speed device on a Full Speed hub. This will send a ][PRE][ token] packet before every packet the host sends (i.e. pre, token, pre, data, pre, ack).

- [SOF_SYNC][ - The SOF Sync bit is used to delay the transaction until after the next SOF. This is useful for interrupt and] isochronous endpoints. The Host controller prevents a transaction of 64bytes from clashing with the SOF packets.

4.1. USB

**391**

RP2040 Datasheet

For longer Isochronous packet the software is responsible for preventing a collision by using the SOF Sync bit and limiting the number of packets sent in one frame. If a transaction is set up with multiple packets the SOF Sync bit only applies to the first packet.

##  **WARNING**

The START_TRANS bit is synchronised separately to other control bits in the SIE_CTRL register. The START_TRANS bit should be set separately to the rest of the data in the SIE_CTRL register, so that the register contents are stable when the controller is prompted to start a transfer. This is necessary because the processor clock clk_sys can be asynchronous to the clk_usb clock.

- [Write fields in ][SIE_CTRL][ apart from ][START_TRANS]

- [nop][ for some ][clk_sys][ cycles to ensure that at least two ][clk_usb][ cycles have passed. For example if ][clk_sys][ was] running at 125MHz and clk_usb was running at 48MHz then 125/48 rounded up would be 6 nop instructions

- [Set the ][START_TRANS][ bit.]

## **4.1.2.9.1. SETUP**

The SETUP packet sent from the host always comes from the dedicated 8 bytes of space at offset 0x0 of the DPSRAM. Like the device controller, there are no control registers associated with the setup packet. The parameters are hard coded and loaded into the hardware when you write to START_TRANS with the SEND_SETUP bit set. Once the setup packet has been sent, the host state machine will wait for an ACK from the device. If there is a timeout then an RX_TIMEOUT error will be raised. If the SEND_TRANS bit is set then the host state machine will move to the OUT phase. Most commonly the SEND_SETUP packet is used in conjunction with the RECEIVE_TRANS bit and will therefore move to the IN phase after sending a setup packet.

## **4.1.2.9.2. IN**

An IN transfer is triggered with the RECEIVE_TRANS bit set when the START_TRANS bit is set. This may be preceded by a SETUP packet being sent if the SEND_SETUP bit was set.

CONTROL phase:

- [Read ] _[EPx control]_[ register located at ][0x80][ to get the endpoint information:]

   - [Are we double buffered?]

   - [What interrupts to enable]

   - [Base address of the data buffer, or data buffers if in double buffered mode]

   - [Endpoint type]

- [Read ] _[EPx buffer control]_[ register at ][0x100][ to get the endpoint buffer information such as transfer length and data] pid. The host state machine still checks for the presence of the AVAILABLE bit, so this needs to be set and FULL needs to be unset. The transaction will not happen until this is the case.

TOKEN phase:

- [Send the ][IN][ token packet to the device. The target device address and endpoint come from the ][ADDR_ENDP] register.

DATA phase:

- [Receive the first data packet from the device. Raise RX timeout error if the device doesn’t reply. Raise DATA SEQ] ERROR if the data packet has wrong DATA PID.

ACK phase:

- [Send ACK to device]

4.1. USB

**392**

RP2040 Datasheet

## STATUS phase:

- [Set ][BUFF_STATUS][ bit and update buffer control register. Will set ][FULL][, ][LAST_BUFF][ if applicable, ][DATA_PID][, ][WR_LEN][.] TRANS_COMPLETE will be set if this is the last buffer in the transfer.

CONTROL phase (pt 2):

- [The host state machine will keep performing ][IN][ transactions until ][LAST_BUFF][ is seen in the buffer_control register. If] the host is in double buffered mode then the host controller will toggle between BUF0 and BUF1 sections of the buffer control register. Otherwise it will keep reading the buffer control register for buffer 0 and wait for the FULL to be unset and AVAILABLE to be set before starting the next IN transaction (i.e. wait in the control phase). The device can send a zero length packet to the host to indicate that it has no more data. In which case the host state machine will stop listening for more data regardless of if the LAST_BUFF flag was set or not. The host software can tell this has happened because BUFF_DONE will be set with a data length of 0 in the buffer control register.

##  **WARNING**

The USB host controller has a bug (RP2040-E4) that means the status written back to the buffer control register can appear in the wrong half of the register. Bits 0-15 are for buffer 0, and bits 16-31 are for buffer 1. The host controller has a buffer selector that is flipped after each transfer is complete. This buffer selector is incorrectly used when writing status information back to the buffer control register even in single buffered mode. The buffer selector is not used when reading the buffer control register. The implication of this is that host software needs to keep track of the buffer selector and shift the buffer control register to the right by 16 bits if the buffer selector is 1.

For more information, see RP2040-E4.

## **4.1.2.9.3. OUT**

An OUT transfer is triggered with the SEND_TRANS bit set when the START_TRANS bit is set. This may be preceded by a SETUP packet being sent if the SEND_SETUP bit was set.

CONTROL phase:

- [Read ] _[EPx control]_[ to get endpoint information (same as ][Section 4.1.2.9.2][)]

- [Read ] _[EPx buffer control]_[ to get the transfer length, data pid. ][AVAILABLE][ and ][FULL][ must be set for the transfer to start.]

TOKEN phase

- [Send ][OUT][ packet to the device. The target device address and endpoint come from the ][ADDR_ENDP][ register.]

DATA phase:

- [Send the first data packet to the device. If the endpoint type is Isochronous then there is no ACK phase so the host] controller will go straight to status phase. If ACK received then go to status phase. Otherwise:

   - [If no reply is received than raise ][SIE_STATUS][.RX_TIMEOUT.]

   - [If ][NAK][ received raise ][SIE_STATUS][.NAK_REC and send the data packet again.]

   - [If ][STALL][ received then raise ][SIE_STATUS][.STALL_REC and go to idle.]

STATUS phase:

- [Set ][BUFF_STATUS][ bit and update buffer control register. ][FULL][ will be set to 0. ][TRANS_COMPLETE][ will be set if this is the] last buffer in the transfer.

4.1. USB

**393**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **WARNING**

The bug mentioned above (RP2040-E4) in the IN section also applies to the OUT section.

CONTROL phase (pt 2):

If this isn’t the last buffer in the transfer then wait for FULL and AVAILABLE to be set in the _EPx buffer control_ register again.

## **4.1.2.9.4. Interrupt Endpoints**

The host controller can poll interrupt endpoints on many devices (up to a maximum of 15 endpoints). To enable these, the programmer must:

- [Pick the next free interrupt endpoint slot on the host controller (starting at 1, to a maximum of 15)]

- [Program the appropriate endpoint control register and buffer control register like you would with a normal ][IN][ or ][OUT] transfer. Note that interrupt endpoints are only single buffered so the BUF1 part of the buffer control register is invalid.

- [Set the address and endpoint of the device in the appropriate ][ADDR_ENDP][ register (][ADDR_ENDP1][ to ][ADDR_ENDP15][).] The preamble bit should be set if the device is Low Speed but attached to a Full Speed hub. The endpoint direction bit should also be set.

- [Set the interrupt endpoint active bit in ][INT_EP_CTRL][ (i.e. set bit 1 to 15 of that register)]

Typically an interrupt endpoint will be an IN transfer. For example, a USB hub would be polled to see if the state of any of its ports have changed. If there is no changed the hub will reply with a NAK to the controller and nothing will happen. Similarly, a mouse will reply with a NAK unless the mouse has been moved since the last time the interrupt endpoint was polled.

Interrupt endpoints are polled by the controller once a SOF packet has been sent by the host controller.

The controller loops from 1 to 15 and will attempt to poll any interrupt endpoint with the EP_ACTIVE bit set to 1 in INT_EP_CTRL. The controller will then read the endpoint control register, and buffer control register to see if there is an available buffer (i.e. FULL + AVAILABLE if an OUT transfer and NOT FULL + AVAILABLE for an IN transfer). If not, the controller will move onto the next interrupt endpoint slot.

If there is an available buffer, then the transfer is dealt with the same as a normal IN or OUT transfer and the BUFF_DONE flag in BUFF_STATUS will be set when the interrupt endpoint has a valid buffer. BUFF_CPU_SHOULD_HANDLE is invalid for interrupt endpoints as there is only a single buffer that can ever be done (RP2040-E3).

## **4.1.2.10. VBUS Control**

The USB controller can be connected up to GPIO pins (see Section 2.19) for the purpose of VBUS control:

- [VBUS enable, used to enable VBUS in host mode. VBUS enable is set in ][SIE_CTRL]

- [VBUS detect, used to detect that VBUS is present in device mode. VBUS detect is a bit in ][SIE_STATUS][ and can also] raise a VBUS_DETECT interrupt (enabled in INTE)

- [VBUS overcurrent, used to detect an overcurrent event. Applicable to both device and host. VBUS overcurrent is a] bit in SIE_STATUS.

It is not necessary to connect up any of these pins to GPIO. The host can permanently supply VBUS and detect a device being connected when either the DP or DM pin is pulled high. VBUS detect can be forced in USB_PWR.

## **4.1.3. Programmer’s Model**

4.1. USB

**394**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.1.3.1. TinyUSB**

The RP2040 TinyUSB port should be considered as the reference implementation for this USB controller. This port can be found in:

https://github.com/hathach/tinyusb/blob/master/src/portable/raspberrypi/rp2040/dcd_rp2040.c

https://github.com/hathach/tinyusb/blob/master/src/portable/raspberrypi/rp2040/hcd_rp2040.c

https://github.com/hathach/tinyusb/blob/master/src/portable/raspberrypi/rp2040/rp2040_usb.h

## **4.1.3.2. Standalone device example**

A standalone USB device example, dev_lowlevel, makes it easier to understand how to interact with the USB controller without needing to understand the TinyUSB abstractions. In addition to endpoint 0, the standalone device has two bulk endpoints: EP1 OUT and EP2 IN. The device is designed to send whatever data it receives on EP1 to EP2. The example comes with a small Python script that writes "Hello World" into EP1 and checks that it is correctly received on EP2.

The code included in this section will walk you through setting up to the USB device controller to receive a setup packet, and then respond to the setup packet.

_Figure 58. USB analyser trace of the dev_lowlevel USB device example. The control transfers are the device enumeration. The first bulk OUT (out from the host) transfer, highlighted in blue, is the host sending "Hello World" to the device. The second bulk transfer IN (in to the host), is the device returning "Hello World" to the host._

**==> picture [425 x 238] intentionally omitted <==**

## **4.1.3.2.1. Device controller initialisation**

The following code initialises the USB device.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/usb/device/dev_lowlevel/dev_lowlevel.c Lines 183 - 217_

- 183 void usb_device_init() { 184 _// Reset usb controller_ 185     reset_unreset_block_num_wait_blocking(RESET_USBCTRL); 186 187 _// Clear any previous state in dpram just in case_ 188     memset(usb_dpram, 0, sizeof(*usb_dpram)); ① 189 190 _// Enable USB interrupt at processor_ 191     irq_set_enabled(USBCTRL_IRQ, true); 192 193 _// Mux the controller to the onboard usb phy_

4.1. USB

**395**

RP2040 Datasheet

194     usb_hw->muxing = USB_USB_MUXING_TO_PHY_BITS | USB_USB_MUXING_SOFTCON_BITS; 195 196 _// Force VBUS detect so the device thinks it is plugged into a host_ 197     usb_hw->pwr = USB_USB_PWR_VBUS_DETECT_BITS | USB_USB_PWR_VBUS_DETECT_OVERRIDE_EN_BITS; 198 199 _// Enable the USB controller in device mode._ 200     usb_hw->main_ctrl = USB_MAIN_CTRL_CONTROLLER_EN_BITS; 201 202 _// Enable an interrupt per EP0 transaction_ 203     usb_hw->sie_ctrl = USB_SIE_CTRL_EP0_INT_1BUF_BITS; ② 204 205 _// Enable interrupts for when a buffer is done, when the bus is reset,_ 206 _// and when a setup packet is received_ 207     usb_hw->inte = USB_INTS_BUFF_STATUS_BITS | 208                    USB_INTS_BUS_RESET_BITS | 209                    USB_INTS_SETUP_REQ_BITS; 210 211 _// Set up endpoints (endpoint control registers)_ 212 _// described by device configuration_ 213     usb_setup_endpoints(); 214 215 _// Present full speed device by enabling pull up on DP_ 216     usb_hw_set->sie_ctrl = USB_SIE_CTRL_PULLUP_EN_BITS; 217 }

## **4.1.3.2.2. Configuring the endpoint control registers for EP1 and EP2**

The function usb_configure_endpoints loops through each endpoint defined in the device configuration (including EP0 in and EP0 out, which don’t have an endpoint control register defined) and calls the usb_configure_endpoint function. This sets up the endpoint control register for that endpoint:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/usb/device/dev_lowlevel/dev_lowlevel.c Lines 149 - 164_

149 void usb_setup_endpoint(const struct usb_endpoint_configuration *ep) { 150     printf("Set up endpoint 0x%x with buffer address 0x%p\n", ep->descriptor>bEndpointAddress, ep->data_buffer); 151 152 _// EP0 doesn't have one so return if that is the case_ 153     if (!ep->endpoint_control) { 154         return; 155     } 156 157 _// Get the data buffer as an offset of the USB controller's DPRAM_ 158     uint32_t dpram_offset = usb_buffer_offset(ep->data_buffer); 159     uint32_t reg = EP_CTRL_ENABLE_BITS 160                    | EP_CTRL_INTERRUPT_PER_BUFFER 161                    | (ep->descriptor->bmAttributes << EP_CTRL_BUFFER_TYPE_LSB) 162                    | dpram_offset; 163     *ep->endpoint_control = reg; 164 }

## **4.1.3.2.3. Receiving a setup packet**

An interrupt is raised when a setup packet is received, so the interrupt handler must handle this event:

4.1. USB

**396**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/usb/device/dev_lowlevel/dev_lowlevel.c Lines 494 - 504_

494 void isr_usbctrl(void) { 495 _// USB interrupt handler_ 496     uint32_t status = usb_hw->ints; 497     uint32_t handled = 0; 498 499 _// Setup packet received_ 500     if (status & USB_INTS_SETUP_REQ_BITS) { 501         handled |= USB_INTS_SETUP_REQ_BITS; 502         usb_hw_clear->sie_status = USB_SIE_STATUS_SETUP_REC_BITS; 503         usb_handle_setup_packet(); 504     }

The setup packet gets written to the first 8 bytes of the USB ram, so the setup packet handler casts that area of memory to struct usb_setup_packet *.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/usb/device/dev_lowlevel/dev_lowlevel.c Lines 383 - 427_

383 void usb_handle_setup_packet(void) { 384     volatile struct usb_setup_packet *pkt = (volatile struct usb_setup_packet *) &usb_dpram ->setup_packet; 385     uint8_t req_direction = pkt->bmRequestType; 386     uint8_t req = pkt->bRequest; 387 388 _// Reset PID to 1 for EP0 IN_ 389     usb_get_endpoint_configuration(EP0_IN_ADDR)->next_pid = 1u; 390 391     if (req_direction == USB_DIR_OUT) { 392         if (req == USB_REQUEST_SET_ADDRESS) { 393             usb_set_device_address(pkt); 394         } else if (req == USB_REQUEST_SET_CONFIGURATION) { 395             usb_set_device_configuration(pkt); 396         } else { 397             usb_acknowledge_out_request(); 398             printf("Other OUT request (0x%x)\r\n", pkt->bRequest); 399         } 400     } else if (req_direction == USB_DIR_IN) { 401         if (req == USB_REQUEST_GET_DESCRIPTOR) { 402             uint16_t descriptor_type = pkt->wValue >> 8; 403 404             switch (descriptor_type) { 405                 case USB_DT_DEVICE: 406                     usb_handle_device_descriptor(pkt); 407                     printf("GET DEVICE DESCRIPTOR\r\n"); 408                     break; 409 410                 case USB_DT_CONFIG: 411                     usb_handle_config_descriptor(pkt); 412                     printf("GET CONFIG DESCRIPTOR\r\n"); 413                     break; 414 415                 case USB_DT_STRING: 416                     usb_handle_string_descriptor(pkt); 417                     printf("GET STRING DESCRIPTOR\r\n"); 418                     break; 419 420                 default: 421                     printf("Unhandled GET_DESCRIPTOR type 0x%x\r\n", descriptor_type); 422             } 423         } else { 424             printf("Other IN request (0x%x)\r\n", pkt->bRequest);

4.1. USB

**397**

RP2040 Datasheet

425         } 426     } 427 }

## **4.1.3.2.4. Replying to a setup packet on EP0 IN**

The first thing a host will request is the device descriptor, the following code handles that setup request.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/usb/device/dev_lowlevel/dev_lowlevel.c Lines 266 - 273_

266 void usb_handle_device_descriptor(volatile struct usb_setup_packet *pkt) { 267     const struct usb_device_descriptor *d = dev_config.device_descriptor; 268 _// EP0 in_ 269     struct usb_endpoint_configuration *ep = usb_get_endpoint_configuration(EP0_IN_ADDR); 270 _// Always respond with pid 1_ 271     ep->next_pid = 1; 272     usb_start_transfer(ep, (uint8_t *) d, MIN(sizeof(struct usb_device_descriptor), pkt>wLength)); 273 }

The usb_start_transfer function copies the data to send into the appropriate hardware buffer, and configures the buffer control register. Once the buffer control register has been written to, the device controller will respond to the host with the data. Before this point, the device will reply with a NAK.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/usb/device/dev_lowlevel/dev_lowlevel.c Lines 238 - 260_

238 void usb_start_transfer(struct usb_endpoint_configuration *ep, uint8_t *buf, uint16_t len) { 239 _// We are asserting that the length is <= 64 bytes for simplicity of the example._ 240 _// For multi packet transfers see the tinyusb port._ 241     assert(len <= 64); 242 243     printf("Start transfer of len %d on ep addr 0x%x\n", len, ep->descriptor>bEndpointAddress); 244 245 _// Prepare buffer control register value_ 246     uint32_t val = len | USB_BUF_CTRL_AVAIL; 247 248     if (ep_is_tx(ep)) { 249 _// Need to copy the data from the user buffer to the usb memory_ 250         memcpy((void *) ep->data_buffer, (void *) buf, len); 251 _// Mark as full_ 252         val |= USB_BUF_CTRL_FULL; 253     } 254 255 _// Set pid and flip for next transfer_ 256     val |= ep->next_pid ? USB_BUF_CTRL_DATA1_PID : USB_BUF_CTRL_DATA0_PID; 257     ep->next_pid ^= 1u; 258 259     *ep->buffer_control = val; 260 }

## **4.1.4. List of Registers**

The USB registers start at a base address of 0x50110000 (defined as USBCTRL_REGS_BASE in SDK).

4.1. USB

**398**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 397. List of USB_<br>_registers_|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x00|ADDR_ENDP|Device address and endpoint control|
||0x04|ADDR_ENDP1|Interrupt endpoint 1. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x08|ADDR_ENDP2|Interrupt endpoint 2. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x0c|ADDR_ENDP3|Interrupt endpoint 3. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x10|ADDR_ENDP4|Interrupt endpoint 4. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x14|ADDR_ENDP5|Interrupt endpoint 5. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x18|ADDR_ENDP6|Interrupt endpoint 6. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x1c|ADDR_ENDP7|Interrupt endpoint 7. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x20|ADDR_ENDP8|Interrupt endpoint 8. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x24|ADDR_ENDP9|Interrupt endpoint 9. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x28|ADDR_ENDP10|Interrupt endpoint 10. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x2c|ADDR_ENDP11|Interrupt endpoint 11. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x30|ADDR_ENDP12|Interrupt endpoint 12. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x34|ADDR_ENDP13|Interrupt endpoint 13. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x38|ADDR_ENDP14|Interrupt endpoint 14. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x3c|ADDR_ENDP15|Interrupt endpoint 15. Only valid for HOST mode.|
||0x40|MAIN_CTRL|Main control register|
||0x44|SOF_WR|Set the SOF (Start of Frame) frame number in the host controller.<br>The SOF packet is sent every 1ms and the host will increment the<br>frame number by 1 each time.|
||0x48|SOF_RD|Read the last SOF (Start of Frame) frame number seen. In device<br>mode the last SOF received from the host. In host mode the last<br>SOF sent by the host.|
||0x4c|SIE_CTRL|SIE control register|
||0x50|SIE_STATUS|SIE status register|
||0x54|INT_EP_CTRL|interrupt endpoint control register|
||0x58|BUFF_STATUS|Buffer status register. A bit set here indicates that a buffer has<br>completed on the endpoint (if the buffer interrupt is enabled). It<br>is possible for 2 buffers to be completed, so clearing the buffer<br>status bit may instantly re set it on the next clock cycle.|
||0x5c|BUFF_CPU_SHOULD_HANDLE|Which of the double buffers should be handled. Only valid if<br>using an interrupt per buffer (i.e. not per 2 buffers). Not valid for<br>host interrupt endpoint polling because they are only single<br>buffered.|
||0x60|EP_ABORT|Device only: Can be set to ignore the buffer control register for<br>this endpoint in case you would like to revoke a buffer. A NAK<br>will be sent for every access to the endpoint until this bit is<br>cleared. A corresponding bit inEP_ABORT_DONEis set when it is safe<br>to modify the buffer control register.|



4.1. USB

**399**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x64|EP_ABORT_DONE|Device only: Used in conjunction withEP_ABORT. Set once an<br>endpoint is idle so the programmer knows it is safe to modify the<br>buffer control register.|
|0x68|EP_STALL_ARM|Device: this bit must be set in conjunction with theSTALLbit in the<br>buffer control register to send a STALL on EP0. The device<br>controller clears these bits when a SETUP packet is received<br>because the USB spec requires that a STALL condition is cleared<br>when a SETUP packet is received.|
|0x6c|NAK_POLL|Used by the host controller. Sets the wait time in microseconds<br>before trying again if the device replies with a NAK.|
|0x70|EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK|Device: bits are set when theIRQ_ON_NAKorIRQ_ON_STALLbits are<br>set. For EP0 this comes fromSIE_CTRL. For all other endpoints it<br>comes from the endpoint control register.|
|0x74|USB_MUXING|Where to connect the USB controller. Should be to_phy by<br>default.|
|0x78|USB_PWR|Overrides for the power signals in the event that the VBUS<br>signals are not hooked up to GPIO. Set the value of the override<br>and then the override enable to switch over to the override value.|
|0x7c|USBPHY_DIRECT|This register allows for direct control of the USB phy. Use in<br>conjunction with usbphy_direct_override register to enable each<br>override bit.|
|0x80|USBPHY_DIRECT_OVERRIDE|Override enable for each control in usbphy_direct|
|0x84|USBPHY_TRIM|Used to adjust trim values of USB phy pull down resistors.|
|0x8c|INTR|Raw Interrupts|
|0x90|INTE|Interrupt Enable|
|0x94|INTF|Interrupt Force|
|0x98|INTS|Interrupt status after masking & forcing|



## **USB: ADDR_ENDP Register**

**Offset** : 0x00

## **Description**

Device address and endpoint control

|_Table 398._<br>_ADDR_ENDP Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:20|Reserved.|-|-|
||19:16|**ENDPOINT**: Device endpoint to send data to. Only valid for HOST mode.|RW|0x0|
||15:7|Reserved.|-|-|
||6:0|**ADDRESS**: In device mode, the address that the device should respond to. Set<br>in response to a SET_ADDR setup packet from the host. In host mode set to<br>the address of the device to communicate with.|RW|0x00|



**USB: ADDR_ENDP1, ADDR_ENDP2, …, ADDR_ENDP14, ADDR_ENDP15 Registers**

4.1. USB

**400**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Offsets** : 0x04, 0x08, …, 0x38, 0x3c

## **Description**

Interrupt endpoint _N_ . Only valid for HOST mode.

|_Table 399._<br>_ADDR_ENDP1,_<br>_ADDR_ENDP2, …,_<br>_ADDR_ENDP14,_<br>_ADDR_ENDP15_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:27|Reserved.|-|-|
||26|**INTEP_PREAMBLE**: Interrupt EP requires preamble (is a low speed device on a<br>full speed hub)|RW|0x0|
||25|**INTEP_DIR**: Direction of the interrupt endpoint. In=0, Out=1|RW|0x0|
||24:20|Reserved.|-|-|
||19:16|**ENDPOINT**: Endpoint number of the interrupt endpoint|RW|0x0|
||15:7|Reserved.|-|-|
||6:0|**ADDRESS**: Device address|RW|0x00|



## **USB: MAIN_CTRL Register**

## **Offset** : 0x40

## **Description**

Main control register

_Table 400. MAIN_CTRL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31|**SIM_TIMING**: Reduced timings for simulation|RW|0x0|
|30:2|Reserved.|-|-|
|1|**HOST_NDEVICE**: Device mode = 0, Host mode = 1|RW|0x0|
|0|**CONTROLLER_EN**: Enable controller|RW|0x0|



## **USB: SOF_WR Register**

## **Offset** : 0x44

## **Description**

Set the SOF (Start of Frame) frame number in the host controller. The SOF packet is sent every 1ms and the host will increment the frame number by 1 each time.

_Table 401. SOF_WR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:11|Reserved.|-|-|
|10:0|**COUNT**|WF|0x000|



## **USB: SOF_RD Register**

**Offset** : 0x48

## **Description**

Read the last SOF (Start of Frame) frame number seen. In device mode the last SOF received from the host. In host mode the last SOF sent by the host.

_Table 402. SOF_RD Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:11|Reserved.|-|-|



4.1. USB

**401**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|10:0|**COUNT**|RO|0x000|



## **USB: SIE_CTRL Register**

**Offset** : 0x4c

## **Description**

SIE control register

|_Table 403. SIE_CTRL_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**EP0_INT_STALL**: Device: Set bit in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK when EP0 sends<br>a STALL|RW|0x0|
||30|**EP0_DOUBLE_BUF**: Device: EP0 single buffered = 0, double buffered = 1|RW|0x0|
||29|**EP0_INT_1BUF**: Device: Set bit in BUFF_STATUS for every buffer completed on<br>EP0|RW|0x0|
||28|**EP0_INT_2BUF**: Device: Set bit in BUFF_STATUS for every 2 buffers completed<br>on EP0|RW|0x0|
||27|**EP0_INT_NAK**: Device: Set bit in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK when EP0 sends a<br>NAK|RW|0x0|
||26|**DIRECT_EN**: Direct bus drive enable|RW|0x0|
||25|**DIRECT_DP**: Direct control of DP|RW|0x0|
||24|**DIRECT_DM**: Direct control of DM|RW|0x0|
||23:19|Reserved.|-|-|
||18|**TRANSCEIVER_PD**: Power down bus transceiver|RW|0x0|
||17|**RPU_OPT**: Device: Pull-up strength (0=1K2, 1=2k3)|RW|0x0|
||16|**PULLUP_EN**: Device: Enable pull up resistor|RW|0x0|
||15|**PULLDOWN_EN**: Host: Enable pull down resistors|RW|0x0|
||14|Reserved.|-|-|
||13|**RESET_BUS**: Host: Reset bus|SC|0x0|
||12|**RESUME**: Device: Remote wakeup. Device can initiate its own resume after<br>suspend.|SC|0x0|
||11|**VBUS_EN**: Host: Enable VBUS|RW|0x0|
||10|**KEEP_ALIVE_EN**: Host: Enable keep alive packet (for low speed bus)|RW|0x0|
||9|**SOF_EN**: Host: Enable SOF generation (for full speed bus)|RW|0x0|
||8|**SOF_SYNC**: Host: Delay packet(s) until after SOF|RW|0x0|
||7|Reserved.|-|-|
||6|**PREAMBLE_EN**: Host: Preable enable for LS device on FS hub|RW|0x0|
||5|Reserved.|-|-|
||4|**STOP_TRANS**: Host: Stop transaction|SC|0x0|
||3|**RECEIVE_DATA**: Host: Receive transaction (IN to host)|RW|0x0|
||2|**SEND_DATA**: Host: Send transaction (OUT from host)|RW|0x0|



4.1. USB

**402**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|**SEND_SETUP**: Host: Send Setup packet|RW|0x0|
|0|**START_TRANS**: Host: Start transaction|SC|0x0|



## **USB: SIE_STATUS Register**

**Offset** : 0x50

## **Description**

SIE status register

|_Table 404._<br>_SIE_STATUS Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**DATA_SEQ_ERROR**: Data Sequence Error.<br>The device can raise a sequence error in the following conditions:<br>* A SETUP packet is received followed by a DATA1 packet (data phase should<br>always be DATA0) * An OUT packet is received from the host but doesn’t<br>match the data pid in the buffer control register read from DPSRAM<br>The host can raise a data sequence error in the following conditions:<br>* An IN packet from the device has the wrong data PID|WC|0x0|
||30|**ACK_REC**: ACK received. Raised by both host and device.|WC|0x0|
||29|**STALL_REC**: Host: STALL received|WC|0x0|
||28|**NAK_REC**: Host: NAK received|WC|0x0|
||27|**RX_TIMEOUT**: RX timeout is raised by both the host and device if an ACK is<br>not received in the maximum time specified by the USB spec.|WC|0x0|
||26|**RX_OVERFLOW**: RX overflow is raised by the Serial RX engine if the incoming<br>data is too fast.|WC|0x0|
||25|**BIT_STUFF_ERROR**: Bit Stuff Error. Raised by the Serial RX engine.|WC|0x0|
||24|**CRC_ERROR**: CRC Error. Raised by the Serial RX engine.|WC|0x0|
||23:20|Reserved.|-|-|
||19|**BUS_RESET**: Device: bus reset received|WC|0x0|
||18|**TRANS_COMPLETE**: Transaction complete.<br>Raised by device if:<br>* An IN or OUT packet is sent with theLAST_BUFFbit set in the buffer control<br>register<br>Raised by host if:<br>* A setup packet is sent when no data in or data out transaction follows * An<br>IN packet is received and theLAST_BUFFbit is set in the buffer control register *<br>An IN packet is received with zero length * An OUT packet is sent and the<br>LAST_BUFFbit is set|WC|0x0|
||17|**SETUP_REC**: Device: Setup packet received|WC|0x0|



4.1. USB

**403**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|16|**CONNECTED**: Device: connected|WC|0x0|
|15:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11|**RESUME**: Host: Device has initiated a remote resume. Device: host has<br>initiated a resume.|WC|0x0|
|10|**VBUS_OVER_CURR**: VBUS over current detected|RO|0x0|
|9:8|**SPEED**: Host: device speed. Disconnected = 00, LS = 01, FS = 10|WC|0x0|
|7:5|Reserved.|-|-|
|4|**SUSPENDED**: Bus in suspended state. Valid for device and host. Host and<br>device will go into suspend if neither Keep Alive / SOF frames are enabled.|WC|0x0|
|3:2|**LINE_STATE**: USB bus line state|RO|0x0|
|1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**VBUS_DETECTED**: Device: VBUS Detected|RO|0x0|



## **USB: INT_EP_CTRL Register**

**Offset** : 0x54

## **Description**

interrupt endpoint control register

|_Table 405._<br>_INT_EP_CTRL Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:1|**INT_EP_ACTIVE**: Host: Enable interrupt endpoint 1→15|RW|0x0000|
||0|Reserved.|-|-|



## **USB: BUFF_STATUS Register**

**Offset** : 0x58

## **Description**

Buffer status register. A bit set here indicates that a buffer has completed on the endpoint (if the buffer interrupt is enabled). It is possible for 2 buffers to be completed, so clearing the buffer status bit may instantly re set it on the next clock cycle.

|_Table 406._<br>_BUFF_STATUS_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**EP15_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||30|**EP15_IN**|WC|0x0|
||29|**EP14_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||28|**EP14_IN**|WC|0x0|
||27|**EP13_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||26|**EP13_IN**|WC|0x0|
||25|**EP12_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||24|**EP12_IN**|WC|0x0|



4.1. USB

**404**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|23|**EP11_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|22|**EP11_IN**|WC|0x0|
|21|**EP10_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|20|**EP10_IN**|WC|0x0|
|19|**EP9_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|18|**EP9_IN**|WC|0x0|
|17|**EP8_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|16|**EP8_IN**|WC|0x0|
|15|**EP7_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|14|**EP7_IN**|WC|0x0|
|13|**EP6_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|12|**EP6_IN**|WC|0x0|
|11|**EP5_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|10|**EP5_IN**|WC|0x0|
|9|**EP4_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|8|**EP4_IN**|WC|0x0|
|7|**EP3_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|6|**EP3_IN**|WC|0x0|
|5|**EP2_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|4|**EP2_IN**|WC|0x0|
|3|**EP1_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|2|**EP1_IN**|WC|0x0|
|1|**EP0_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|0|**EP0_IN**|WC|0x0|



## **USB: BUFF_CPU_SHOULD_HANDLE Register**

## **Offset** : 0x5c

## **Description**

Which of the double buffers should be handled. Only valid if using an interrupt per buffer (i.e. not per 2 buffers). Not valid for host interrupt endpoint polling because they are only single buffered.

|_Table 407._<br>_BUFF_CPU_SHOULD_H_<br>_ANDLE Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**EP15_OUT**|RO|0x0|
||30|**EP15_IN**|RO|0x0|
||29|**EP14_OUT**|RO|0x0|
||28|**EP14_IN**|RO|0x0|
||27|**EP13_OUT**|RO|0x0|
||26|**EP13_IN**|RO|0x0|



4.1. USB

**405**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|25|**EP12_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|24|**EP12_IN**|RO|0x0|
|23|**EP11_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|22|**EP11_IN**|RO|0x0|
|21|**EP10_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|20|**EP10_IN**|RO|0x0|
|19|**EP9_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|18|**EP9_IN**|RO|0x0|
|17|**EP8_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|16|**EP8_IN**|RO|0x0|
|15|**EP7_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|14|**EP7_IN**|RO|0x0|
|13|**EP6_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|12|**EP6_IN**|RO|0x0|
|11|**EP5_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|10|**EP5_IN**|RO|0x0|
|9|**EP4_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|8|**EP4_IN**|RO|0x0|
|7|**EP3_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|6|**EP3_IN**|RO|0x0|
|5|**EP2_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|4|**EP2_IN**|RO|0x0|
|3|**EP1_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|2|**EP1_IN**|RO|0x0|
|1|**EP0_OUT**|RO|0x0|
|0|**EP0_IN**|RO|0x0|



## **USB: EP_ABORT Register**

## **Offset** : 0x60

## **Description**

Device only: Can be set to ignore the buffer control register for this endpoint in case you would like to revoke a buffer. A NAK will be sent for every access to the endpoint until this bit is cleared. A corresponding bit in EP_ABORT_DONE is set when it is safe to modify the buffer control register.

_Table 408. EP_ABORT Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31|**EP15_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|30|**EP15_IN**|RW|0x0|
|29|**EP14_OUT**|RW|0x0|



4.1. USB

**406**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|28|**EP14_IN**|RW|0x0|
|27|**EP13_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|26|**EP13_IN**|RW|0x0|
|25|**EP12_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|24|**EP12_IN**|RW|0x0|
|23|**EP11_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|22|**EP11_IN**|RW|0x0|
|21|**EP10_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|20|**EP10_IN**|RW|0x0|
|19|**EP9_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|18|**EP9_IN**|RW|0x0|
|17|**EP8_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|16|**EP8_IN**|RW|0x0|
|15|**EP7_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|14|**EP7_IN**|RW|0x0|
|13|**EP6_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|12|**EP6_IN**|RW|0x0|
|11|**EP5_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|10|**EP5_IN**|RW|0x0|
|9|**EP4_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|8|**EP4_IN**|RW|0x0|
|7|**EP3_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|6|**EP3_IN**|RW|0x0|
|5|**EP2_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|4|**EP2_IN**|RW|0x0|
|3|**EP1_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|2|**EP1_IN**|RW|0x0|
|1|**EP0_OUT**|RW|0x0|
|0|**EP0_IN**|RW|0x0|



## **USB: EP_ABORT_DONE Register**

**Offset** : 0x64

## **Description**

Device only: Used in conjunction with EP_ABORT. Set once an endpoint is idle so the programmer knows it is safe to modify the buffer control register.

4.1. USB

**407**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 409._<br>_EP_ABORT_DONE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**EP15_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||30|**EP15_IN**|WC|0x0|
||29|**EP14_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||28|**EP14_IN**|WC|0x0|
||27|**EP13_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||26|**EP13_IN**|WC|0x0|
||25|**EP12_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||24|**EP12_IN**|WC|0x0|
||23|**EP11_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||22|**EP11_IN**|WC|0x0|
||21|**EP10_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||20|**EP10_IN**|WC|0x0|
||19|**EP9_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||18|**EP9_IN**|WC|0x0|
||17|**EP8_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||16|**EP8_IN**|WC|0x0|
||15|**EP7_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||14|**EP7_IN**|WC|0x0|
||13|**EP6_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||12|**EP6_IN**|WC|0x0|
||11|**EP5_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||10|**EP5_IN**|WC|0x0|
||9|**EP4_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||8|**EP4_IN**|WC|0x0|
||7|**EP3_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||6|**EP3_IN**|WC|0x0|
||5|**EP2_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||4|**EP2_IN**|WC|0x0|
||3|**EP1_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||2|**EP1_IN**|WC|0x0|
||1|**EP0_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||0|**EP0_IN**|WC|0x0|



## **USB: EP_STALL_ARM Register**

**Offset** : 0x68

4.1. USB

**408**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Device: this bit must be set in conjunction with the STALL bit in the buffer control register to send a STALL on EP0. The device controller clears these bits when a SETUP packet is received because the USB spec requires that a STALL condition is cleared when a SETUP packet is received.

|_Table 410._<br>_EP_STALL_ARM_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:2|Reserved.|-|-|
||1|**EP0_OUT**|RW|0x0|
||0|**EP0_IN**|RW|0x0|



## **USB: NAK_POLL Register**

**Offset** : 0x6c

## **Description**

Used by the host controller. Sets the wait time in microseconds before trying again if the device replies with a NAK.

|_Table 411. NAK_POLL_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:26|Reserved.|-|-|
||25:16|**DELAY_FS**: NAK polling interval for a full speed device|RW|0x010|
||15:10|Reserved.|-|-|
||9:0|**DELAY_LS**: NAK polling interval for a low speed device|RW|0x010|



## **USB: EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK Register**

**Offset** : 0x70

## **Description**

Device: bits are set when the IRQ_ON_NAK or IRQ_ON_STALL bits are set. For EP0 this comes from SIE_CTRL. For all other endpoints it comes from the endpoint control register.

|_Table 412._<br>_EP_STATUS_STALL_N_<br>_AK Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31|**EP15_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||30|**EP15_IN**|WC|0x0|
||29|**EP14_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||28|**EP14_IN**|WC|0x0|
||27|**EP13_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||26|**EP13_IN**|WC|0x0|
||25|**EP12_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||24|**EP12_IN**|WC|0x0|
||23|**EP11_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||22|**EP11_IN**|WC|0x0|
||21|**EP10_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||20|**EP10_IN**|WC|0x0|
||19|**EP9_OUT**|WC|0x0|
||18|**EP9_IN**|WC|0x0|



4.1. USB

**409**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|17|**EP8_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|16|**EP8_IN**|WC|0x0|
|15|**EP7_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|14|**EP7_IN**|WC|0x0|
|13|**EP6_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|12|**EP6_IN**|WC|0x0|
|11|**EP5_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|10|**EP5_IN**|WC|0x0|
|9|**EP4_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|8|**EP4_IN**|WC|0x0|
|7|**EP3_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|6|**EP3_IN**|WC|0x0|
|5|**EP2_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|4|**EP2_IN**|WC|0x0|
|3|**EP1_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|2|**EP1_IN**|WC|0x0|
|1|**EP0_OUT**|WC|0x0|
|0|**EP0_IN**|WC|0x0|



## **USB: USB_MUXING Register**

**Offset** : 0x74

## **Description**

Where to connect the USB controller. Should be to_phy by default.

_Table 413. USB_MUXING Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3|**SOFTCON**|RW|0x0|
|2|**TO_DIGITAL_PAD**|RW|0x0|
|1|**TO_EXTPHY**|RW|0x0|
|0|**TO_PHY**|RW|0x0|



## **USB: USB_PWR Register**

**Offset** : 0x78

## **Description**

Overrides for the power signals in the event that the VBUS signals are not hooked up to GPIO. Set the value of the override and then the override enable to switch over to the override value.

_Table 414. USB_PWR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:6|Reserved.|-|-|



4.1. USB

**410**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|5|**OVERCURR_DETECT_EN**|RW|0x0|
|4|**OVERCURR_DETECT**|RW|0x0|
|3|**VBUS_DETECT_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|2|**VBUS_DETECT**|RW|0x0|
|1|**VBUS_EN_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|0|**VBUS_EN**|RW|0x0|



## **USB: USBPHY_DIRECT Register**

## **Offset** : 0x7c

## **Description**

This register allows for direct control of the USB phy. Use in conjunction with usbphy_direct_override register to enable each override bit.

_Table 415. USBPHY_DIRECT Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:23|Reserved.|-|-|
|22|**DM_OVV**: DM over voltage|RO|0x0|
|21|**DP_OVV**: DP over voltage|RO|0x0|
|20|**DM_OVCN**: DM overcurrent|RO|0x0|
|19|**DP_OVCN**: DP overcurrent|RO|0x0|
|18|**RX_DM**: DPM pin state|RO|0x0|
|17|**RX_DP**: DPP pin state|RO|0x0|
|16|**RX_DD**: Differential RX|RO|0x0|
|15|**TX_DIFFMODE**: TX_DIFFMODE=0: Single ended mode<br>TX_DIFFMODE=1: Differential drive mode (TX_DM, TX_DM_OE ignored)|RW|0x0|
|14|**TX_FSSLEW**: TX_FSSLEW=0: Low speed slew rate<br>TX_FSSLEW=1: Full speed slew rate|RW|0x0|
|13|**TX_PD**: TX power down override (if override enable is set). 1 = powered down.|RW|0x0|
|12|**RX_PD**: RX power down override (if override enable is set). 1 = powered down.|RW|0x0|
|11|**TX_DM**: Output data. TX_DIFFMODE=1, Ignored<br>TX_DIFFMODE=0, Drives DPM only. TX_DM_OE=1 to enable drive.<br>DPM=TX_DM|RW|0x0|
|10|**TX_DP**: Output data. If TX_DIFFMODE=1, Drives DPP/DPM diff pair.<br>TX_DP_OE=1 to enable drive. DPP=TX_DP, DPM=~TX_DP<br>If TX_DIFFMODE=0, Drives DPP only. TX_DP_OE=1 to enable drive.<br>DPP=TX_DP|RW|0x0|
|9|**TX_DM_OE**: Output enable. If TX_DIFFMODE=1, Ignored.<br>If TX_DIFFMODE=0, OE for DPM only. 0 - DPM in Hi-Z state; 1 - DPM driving|RW|0x0|
|8|**TX_DP_OE**: Output enable. If TX_DIFFMODE=1, OE for DPP/DPM diff pair. 0 -<br>DPP/DPM in Hi-Z state; 1 - DPP/DPM driving<br>If TX_DIFFMODE=0, OE for DPP only. 0 - DPP in Hi-Z state; 1 - DPP driving|RW|0x0|
|7|Reserved.|-|-|



4.1. USB

**411**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|6|**DM_PULLDN_EN**: DM pull down enable|RW|0x0|
|5|**DM_PULLUP_EN**: DM pull up enable|RW|0x0|
|4|**DM_PULLUP_HISEL**: Enable the second DM pull up resistor. 0 - Pull = Rpu2; 1 -<br>Pull = Rpu1 + Rpu2|RW|0x0|
|3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**DP_PULLDN_EN**: DP pull down enable|RW|0x0|
|1|**DP_PULLUP_EN**: DP pull up enable|RW|0x0|
|0|**DP_PULLUP_HISEL**: Enable the second DP pull up resistor. 0 - Pull = Rpu2; 1 -<br>Pull = Rpu1 + Rpu2|RW|0x0|



## **USB: USBPHY_DIRECT_OVERRIDE Register**

**Offset** : 0x80

## **Description**

Override enable for each control in usbphy_direct

_Table 416. USBPHY_DIRECT_OVE RRIDE Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15|**TX_DIFFMODE_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|14:13|Reserved.|-|-|
|12|**DM_PULLUP_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|11|**TX_FSSLEW_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|10|**TX_PD_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|9|**RX_PD_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|8|**TX_DM_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|7|**TX_DP_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|6|**TX_DM_OE_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|5|**TX_DP_OE_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|4|**DM_PULLDN_EN_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|3|**DP_PULLDN_EN_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|2|**DP_PULLUP_EN_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|1|**DM_PULLUP_HISEL_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|
|0|**DP_PULLUP_HISEL_OVERRIDE_EN**|RW|0x0|



## **USB: USBPHY_TRIM Register**

**Offset** : 0x84

## **Description**

Used to adjust trim values of USB phy pull down resistors.

4.1. USB

**412**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 417. USBPHY_TRIM Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:13|Reserved.|-|-|
|12:8|**DM_PULLDN_TRIM**: Value to drive to USB PHY<br>DM pulldown resistor trim control<br>Experimental data suggests that the reset value will work, but this register<br>allows adjustment if required|RW|0x1f|
|7:5|Reserved.|-|-|
|4:0|**DP_PULLDN_TRIM**: Value to drive to USB PHY<br>DP pulldown resistor trim control<br>Experimental data suggests that the reset value will work, but this register<br>allows adjustment if required|RW|0x1f|



## **USB: INTR Register**

**Offset** : 0x8c

## **Description**

Raw Interrupts

_Table 418. INTR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:20|Reserved.|-|-|
|19|**EP_STALL_NAK**: Raised when any bit in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK is set. Clear<br>by clearing all bits in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK.|RO|0x0|
|18|**ABORT_DONE**: Raised when any bit in ABORT_DONE is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in ABORT_DONE.|RO|0x0|
|17|**DEV_SOF**: Set every time the device receives a SOF (Start of Frame) packet.<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RO|0x0|
|16|**SETUP_REQ**: Device. Source: SIE_STATUS.SETUP_REC|RO|0x0|
|15|**DEV_RESUME_FROM_HOST**: Set when the device receives a resume from the<br>host. Cleared by writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RO|0x0|
|14|**DEV_SUSPEND**: Set when the device suspend state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.SUSPENDED|RO|0x0|
|13|**DEV_CONN_DIS**: Set when the device connection state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.CONNECTED|RO|0x0|
|12|**BUS_RESET**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BUS_RESET|RO|0x0|
|11|**VBUS_DETECT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.VBUS_DETECTED|RO|0x0|
|10|**STALL**: Source: SIE_STATUS.STALL_REC|RO|0x0|
|9|**ERROR_CRC**: Source: SIE_STATUS.CRC_ERROR|RO|0x0|
|8|**ERROR_BIT_STUFF**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BIT_STUFF_ERROR|RO|0x0|
|7|**ERROR_RX_OVERFLOW**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_OVERFLOW|RO|0x0|
|6|**ERROR_RX_TIMEOUT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_TIMEOUT|RO|0x0|
|5|**ERROR_DATA_SEQ**: Source: SIE_STATUS.DATA_SEQ_ERROR|RO|0x0|
|4|**BUFF_STATUS**: Raised when any bit in BUFF_STATUS is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in BUFF_STATUS.|RO|0x0|



4.1. USB

**413**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|3|**TRANS_COMPLETE**: Raised every time SIE_STATUS.TRANS_COMPLETE is<br>set. Clear by writing to this bit.|RO|0x0|
|2|**HOST_SOF**: Host: raised every time the host sends a SOF (Start of Frame).<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RO|0x0|
|1|**HOST_RESUME**: Host: raised when a device wakes up the host. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RO|0x0|
|0|**HOST_CONN_DIS**: Host: raised when a device is connected or disconnected<br>(i.e. when SIE_STATUS.SPEED changes). Cleared by writing to<br>SIE_STATUS.SPEED|RO|0x0|



## **USB: INTE Register**

**Offset** : 0x90

**Description**

Interrupt Enable

|_Table 419. INTE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:20|Reserved.|-|-|
||19|**EP_STALL_NAK**: Raised when any bit in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK is set. Clear<br>by clearing all bits in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK.|RW|0x0|
||18|**ABORT_DONE**: Raised when any bit in ABORT_DONE is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in ABORT_DONE.|RW|0x0|
||17|**DEV_SOF**: Set every time the device receives a SOF (Start of Frame) packet.<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RW|0x0|
||16|**SETUP_REQ**: Device. Source: SIE_STATUS.SETUP_REC|RW|0x0|
||15|**DEV_RESUME_FROM_HOST**: Set when the device receives a resume from the<br>host. Cleared by writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RW|0x0|
||14|**DEV_SUSPEND**: Set when the device suspend state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.SUSPENDED|RW|0x0|
||13|**DEV_CONN_DIS**: Set when the device connection state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.CONNECTED|RW|0x0|
||12|**BUS_RESET**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BUS_RESET|RW|0x0|
||11|**VBUS_DETECT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.VBUS_DETECTED|RW|0x0|
||10|**STALL**: Source: SIE_STATUS.STALL_REC|RW|0x0|
||9|**ERROR_CRC**: Source: SIE_STATUS.CRC_ERROR|RW|0x0|
||8|**ERROR_BIT_STUFF**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BIT_STUFF_ERROR|RW|0x0|
||7|**ERROR_RX_OVERFLOW**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_OVERFLOW|RW|0x0|
||6|**ERROR_RX_TIMEOUT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_TIMEOUT|RW|0x0|
||5|**ERROR_DATA_SEQ**: Source: SIE_STATUS.DATA_SEQ_ERROR|RW|0x0|
||4|**BUFF_STATUS**: Raised when any bit in BUFF_STATUS is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in BUFF_STATUS.|RW|0x0|
||3|**TRANS_COMPLETE**: Raised every time SIE_STATUS.TRANS_COMPLETE is<br>set. Clear by writing to this bit.|RW|0x0|



4.1. USB

**414**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|**HOST_SOF**: Host: raised every time the host sends a SOF (Start of Frame).<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RW|0x0|
|1|**HOST_RESUME**: Host: raised when a device wakes up the host. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RW|0x0|
|0|**HOST_CONN_DIS**: Host: raised when a device is connected or disconnected<br>(i.e. when SIE_STATUS.SPEED changes). Cleared by writing to<br>SIE_STATUS.SPEED|RW|0x0|



## **USB: INTF Register**

**Offset** : 0x94

## **Description**

Interrupt Force

_Table 420. INTF Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:20|Reserved.|-|-|
|19|**EP_STALL_NAK**: Raised when any bit in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK is set. Clear<br>by clearing all bits in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK.|RW|0x0|
|18|**ABORT_DONE**: Raised when any bit in ABORT_DONE is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in ABORT_DONE.|RW|0x0|
|17|**DEV_SOF**: Set every time the device receives a SOF (Start of Frame) packet.<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RW|0x0|
|16|**SETUP_REQ**: Device. Source: SIE_STATUS.SETUP_REC|RW|0x0|
|15|**DEV_RESUME_FROM_HOST**: Set when the device receives a resume from the<br>host. Cleared by writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RW|0x0|
|14|**DEV_SUSPEND**: Set when the device suspend state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.SUSPENDED|RW|0x0|
|13|**DEV_CONN_DIS**: Set when the device connection state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.CONNECTED|RW|0x0|
|12|**BUS_RESET**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BUS_RESET|RW|0x0|
|11|**VBUS_DETECT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.VBUS_DETECTED|RW|0x0|
|10|**STALL**: Source: SIE_STATUS.STALL_REC|RW|0x0|
|9|**ERROR_CRC**: Source: SIE_STATUS.CRC_ERROR|RW|0x0|
|8|**ERROR_BIT_STUFF**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BIT_STUFF_ERROR|RW|0x0|
|7|**ERROR_RX_OVERFLOW**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_OVERFLOW|RW|0x0|
|6|**ERROR_RX_TIMEOUT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_TIMEOUT|RW|0x0|
|5|**ERROR_DATA_SEQ**: Source: SIE_STATUS.DATA_SEQ_ERROR|RW|0x0|
|4|**BUFF_STATUS**: Raised when any bit in BUFF_STATUS is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in BUFF_STATUS.|RW|0x0|
|3|**TRANS_COMPLETE**: Raised every time SIE_STATUS.TRANS_COMPLETE is<br>set. Clear by writing to this bit.|RW|0x0|
|2|**HOST_SOF**: Host: raised every time the host sends a SOF (Start of Frame).<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RW|0x0|



4.1. USB

**415**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|**HOST_RESUME**: Host: raised when a device wakes up the host. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RW|0x0|
|0|**HOST_CONN_DIS**: Host: raised when a device is connected or disconnected<br>(i.e. when SIE_STATUS.SPEED changes). Cleared by writing to<br>SIE_STATUS.SPEED|RW|0x0|



## **USB: INTS Register**

**Offset** : 0x98

## **Description**

Interrupt status after masking & forcing

_Table 421. INTS Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:20|Reserved.|-|-|
|19|**EP_STALL_NAK**: Raised when any bit in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK is set. Clear<br>by clearing all bits in EP_STATUS_STALL_NAK.|RO|0x0|
|18|**ABORT_DONE**: Raised when any bit in ABORT_DONE is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in ABORT_DONE.|RO|0x0|
|17|**DEV_SOF**: Set every time the device receives a SOF (Start of Frame) packet.<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RO|0x0|
|16|**SETUP_REQ**: Device. Source: SIE_STATUS.SETUP_REC|RO|0x0|
|15|**DEV_RESUME_FROM_HOST**: Set when the device receives a resume from the<br>host. Cleared by writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RO|0x0|
|14|**DEV_SUSPEND**: Set when the device suspend state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.SUSPENDED|RO|0x0|
|13|**DEV_CONN_DIS**: Set when the device connection state changes. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.CONNECTED|RO|0x0|
|12|**BUS_RESET**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BUS_RESET|RO|0x0|
|11|**VBUS_DETECT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.VBUS_DETECTED|RO|0x0|
|10|**STALL**: Source: SIE_STATUS.STALL_REC|RO|0x0|
|9|**ERROR_CRC**: Source: SIE_STATUS.CRC_ERROR|RO|0x0|
|8|**ERROR_BIT_STUFF**: Source: SIE_STATUS.BIT_STUFF_ERROR|RO|0x0|
|7|**ERROR_RX_OVERFLOW**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_OVERFLOW|RO|0x0|
|6|**ERROR_RX_TIMEOUT**: Source: SIE_STATUS.RX_TIMEOUT|RO|0x0|
|5|**ERROR_DATA_SEQ**: Source: SIE_STATUS.DATA_SEQ_ERROR|RO|0x0|
|4|**BUFF_STATUS**: Raised when any bit in BUFF_STATUS is set. Clear by clearing<br>all bits in BUFF_STATUS.|RO|0x0|
|3|**TRANS_COMPLETE**: Raised every time SIE_STATUS.TRANS_COMPLETE is<br>set. Clear by writing to this bit.|RO|0x0|
|2|**HOST_SOF**: Host: raised every time the host sends a SOF (Start of Frame).<br>Cleared by reading SOF_RD|RO|0x0|
|1|**HOST_RESUME**: Host: raised when a device wakes up the host. Cleared by<br>writing to SIE_STATUS.RESUME|RO|0x0|



4.1. USB

**416**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|**HOST_CONN_DIS**: Host: raised when a device is connected or disconnected<br>(i.e. when SIE_STATUS.SPEED changes). Cleared by writing to<br>SIE_STATUS.SPEED|RO|0x0|



## **References**

▪[[1] ][USB Made Simple]

- [[2]][USB 2.0 Specification]
