## **4.2. UART**

## **ARM Documentation**

Excerpted from the PrimeCell UART (PL011) Technical Reference Manual. Used with permission.

RP2040 has 2 identical instances of a UART peripheral, based on the ARM Primecell UART (PL011) (Revision r1p5).

Each instance supports the following features:

- [Separate 32×8 Tx and 32×12 Rx FIFOs]

- [Programmable baud rate generator, clocked by ][clk_peri][ (see ][Section 2.15.1][)]

- [Standard asynchronous communication bits (start, stop, parity) added on transmit and removed on receive]

- [line break detection]

- [programmable serial interface (5, 6, 7, or 8 bits)]

- [1 or 2 stop bits]

- [programmable hardware flow control]

Each UART can be connected to a number of GPIO pins as defined in the GPIO muxing table in Section 2.19.2. Connections to the GPIO muxing are prefixed with the UART instance name uart0_ or uart1_, and include the following:

- [Transmit data ][tx][ (referred to as UARTTXD in the following sections)]

- [Received data ][rx][ (referred to as UARTRXD in the following sections)]

- [Output flow control ][rts][ (referred to as nUARTRTS in the following sections)]

- [Input flow control ][cts][ (referred to as nUARTCTS in the following sections)]

The modem mode and IrDA mode of the PL011 are not supported.

The UARTCLK is driven from clk_peri, and PCLK is driven from the system clock clk_sys (see Section 2.15.1).

## **4.2.1. Overview**

The UART performs:

- [Serial-to-parallel conversion on data received from a peripheral device]

- [Parallel-to-serial conversion on data transmitted to the peripheral device.]

The CPU reads and writes data and control/status information through the AMBA APB interface. The transmit and receive paths are buffered with internal FIFO memories enabling up to 32-bytes to be stored independently in both

4.2. UART

**417**

RP2040 Datasheet

transmit and receive modes.

The UART:

- [Includes a programmable baud rate generator that generates a common transmit and receive internal clock from] the UART internal reference clock input, UARTCLK

- [Offers similar functionality to the industry-standard 16C650 UART device]

- [Supports a maximum baud rate of UARTCLK / 16 in UART mode (7.8 Mbaud at 125MHz)]

The UART operation and baud rate values are controlled by the Line Control Register, UARTLCR_H and the baud rate divisor registers (Integer Baud Rate Register, UARTIBRD and Fractional Baud Rate Register, UARTFBRD).

The UART can generate:

- [Individually-maskable interrupts from the receive (including timeout), transmit, modem status and error conditions]

- [A single combined interrupt so that the output is asserted if any of the individual interrupts are asserted, and] unmasked

- [DMA request signals for interfacing with a Direct Memory Access (DMA) controller.]

If a framing, parity, or break error occurs during reception, the appropriate error bit is set, and is stored in the FIFO. If an overrun condition occurs, the overrun register bit is set immediately and FIFO data is prevented from being overwritten.

You can program the FIFOs to be 1-byte deep providing a conventional double-buffered UART interface.

There is a programmable hardware flow control feature that uses the nUARTCTS input and the nUARTRTS output to automatically control the serial data flow.

## **4.2.2. Functional description**

_Figure 59. UART block diagram. Test logic is not shown for clarity._

**==> picture [297 x 304] intentionally omitted <==**

4.2. UART

**418**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.2.1. AMBA APB interface**

The AMBA APB interface generates read and write decodes for accesses to status/control registers, and the transmit and receive FIFOs.

## **4.2.2.2. Register block**

The register block stores data written, or to be read across the AMBA APB interface.

## **4.2.2.3. Baud rate generator**

The baud rate generator contains free-running counters that generate the internal clocks: Baud16 and IrLPBaud16 signals. Baud16 provides timing information for UART transmit and receive control. Baud16 is a stream of pulses with a width of one UARTCLK clock period and a frequency of 16 times the baud rate.

## **4.2.2.4. Transmit FIFO**

The transmit FIFO is an 8-bit wide, 32 location deep, FIFO memory buffer. CPU data written across the APB interface is stored in the FIFO until read out by the transmit logic. You can disable the transmit FIFO to act like a one-byte holding register.

## **4.2.2.5. Receive FIFO**

The receive FIFO is a 12-bit wide, 32 location deep, FIFO memory buffer. Received data and corresponding error bits, are stored in the receive FIFO by the receive logic until read out by the CPU across the APB interface. The receive FIFO can be disabled to act like a one-byte holding register.

## **4.2.2.6. Transmit logic**

The transmit logic performs parallel-to-serial conversion on the data read from the transmit FIFO. Control logic outputs the serial bit stream beginning with a start bit, data bits with the Least Significant Bit (LSB) first, followed by the parity bit, and then the stop bits according to the programmed configuration in control registers.

## **4.2.2.7. Receive logic**

The receive logic performs serial-to-parallel conversion on the received bit stream after a valid start pulse has been detected. Overrun, parity, frame error checking, and line break detection are also performed, and their status accompanies the data that is written to the receive FIFO.

## **4.2.2.8. Interrupt generation logic**

Individual maskable active HIGH interrupts are generated by the UART. A combined interrupt output is generated as an OR function of the individual interrupt requests and is connected to the processor interrupt controllers.

See Section 4.2.6 for more information.

4.2. UART

**419**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.2.9. DMA interface**

The UART provides an interface to connect to the DMA controller as UART DMA interface in Section 4.2.5 describes.

## **4.2.2.10. Synchronizing registers and logic**

The UART supports both asynchronous and synchronous operation of the clocks, PCLK and UARTCLK. Synchronization registers and handshaking logic have been implemented, and are active at all times. This has a minimal impact on performance or area. Synchronization of control signals is performed on both directions of data flow, that is from the PCLK to the UARTCLK domain, and from the UARTCLK to the PCLK domain.

## **4.2.3. Operation**

## **4.2.3.1. Clock signals**

The frequency selected for UARTCLK must accommodate the required range of baud rates:

- [FUARTCLK (min) ≥ 16 × baud_rate(max)]

- [FUARTCLK(max) ≤ 16 × 65535 × baud_rate(min)]

For example, for a range of baud rates from 110 baud to 460800 baud the UARTCLK frequency must be between 7.3728MHz to 115.34MHz.

The frequency of UARTCLK must also be within the required error limits for all baud rates to be used.

There is also a constraint on the ratio of clock frequencies for PCLK to UARTCLK. The frequency of UARTCLK must be no more than 5/3 times faster than the frequency of PCLK:

- [FUARTCLK ≤ 5/3 × FPCLK]

For example, in UART mode, to generate 921600 baud when UARTCLK is 14.7456MHz then PCLK must be greater than or equal to 8.85276MHz. This ensures that the UART has sufficient time to write the received data to the receive FIFO.

## **4.2.3.2. UART operation**

Control data is written to the UART Line Control Register, UARTLCR. This register is 30-bits wide internally, but is externally accessed through the APB interface by writes to the following registers:

The UARTLCR_H register defines the:

- [transmission parameters]

- [word length]

- [buffer mode]

- [number of transmitted stop bits]

- [parity mode]

- [break generation.]

The UARTIBRD register defines the integer baud rate divider, and the UARTFBRD register defines the fractional baud rate divider.

4.2. UART

**420**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.3.2.1. Fractional baud rate divider**

The baud rate divisor is a 22-bit number consisting of a 16-bit integer and a 6-bit fractional part. This is used by the baud rate generator to determine the bit period. The fractional baud rate divider enables the use of any clock with a frequency >3.6864MHz to act as UARTCLK, while it is still possible to generate all the standard baud rates.

The 16-bit integer is written to the Integer Baud Rate Register, UARTIBRD. The 6-bit fractional part is written to the Fractional Baud Rate Register, UARTFBRD. The Baud Rate Divisor has the following relationship to UARTCLK:

Baud Rate Divisor = UARTCLK/(16×Baud Rate) = where is the integer part and is the fractional part separated by a decimal point as Figure 60.

_Figure 60. Baud rate divisor._

**==> picture [297 x 41] intentionally omitted <==**

You can calculate the 6-bit number ( ) by taking the fractional part of the required baud rate divisor and multiplying it by 64 (that is, , where is the width of the UARTFBRD Register) and adding 0.5 to account for rounding errors:

**==> picture [120 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

An internal clock enable signal, Baud16, is generated, and is a stream of one UARTCLK wide pulses with an average frequency of 16 times the required baud rate. This signal is then divided by 16 to give the transmit clock. A low number in the baud rate divisor gives a short bit period, and a high number in the baud rate divisor gives a long bit period.

## **4.2.3.2.2. Data transmission or reception**

Data received or transmitted is stored in two 32-byte FIFOs, though the receive FIFO has an extra four bits per character for status information. For transmission, data is written into the transmit FIFO. If the UART is enabled, it causes a data frame to start transmitting with the parameters indicated in the Line Control Register, UARTLCR_H. Data continues to be transmitted until there is no data left in the transmit FIFO. The BUSY signal goes HIGH as soon as data is written to the transmit FIFO (that is, the FIFO is non-empty) and remains asserted HIGH while data is being transmitted. BUSY is negated only when the transmit FIFO is empty, and the last character has been transmitted from the shift register, including the stop bits. BUSY can be asserted HIGH even though the UART might no longer be enabled.

For each sample of data, three readings are taken and the majority value is kept. In the following paragraphs the middle sampling point is defined, and one sample is taken either side of it.

When the receiver is idle (UARTRXD continuously 1, in the marking state) and a LOW is detected on the data input (a start bit has been received), the receive counter, with the clock enabled by Baud16, begins running and data is sampled on the eighth cycle of that counter in UART mode, or the fourth cycle of the counter in SIR mode to allow for the shorter logic 0 pulses (half way through a bit period).

The start bit is valid if UARTRXD is still LOW on the eighth cycle of Baud16, otherwise a false start bit is detected and it is ignored.

If the start bit was valid, successive data bits are sampled on every 16th cycle of Baud16 (that is, one bit period later) according to the programmed length of the data characters. The parity bit is then checked if parity mode was enabled.

Lastly, a valid stop bit is confirmed if UARTRXD is HIGH, otherwise a framing error has occurred. When a full word is received, the data is stored in the receive FIFO, with any error bits associated with that word

## **4.2.3.2.3. Error bits**

Three error bits are stored in bits [10:8] of the receive FIFO, and are associated with a particular character. There is an additional error that indicates an overrun error and this is stored in bit 11 of the receive FIFO.

4.2. UART

**421**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.3.2.4. Overrun bit**

The overrun bit is not associated with the character in the receive FIFO. The overrun error is set when the FIFO is full, and the next character is completely received in the shift register. The data in the shift register is overwritten, but it is not written into the FIFO. When an empty location is available in the receive FIFO, and another character is received, the state of the overrun bit is copied into the receive FIFO along with the received character. The overrun state is then cleared. Table 422 lists the bit functions of the receive FIFO.

_Table 422. Receive FIFO bit functions_

|**FIFO bit**|**Function**|
|---|---|
|11|Overrun indicator|
|10|Break error|
|9|Parity error|
|8|Framing error|
|7:0|Received data|



## **4.2.3.2.5. Disabling the FIFOs**

Additionally, you can disable the FIFOs. In this case, the transmit and receive sides of the UART have 1-byte holding registers (the bottom entry of the FIFOs). The overrun bit is set when a word has been received, and the previous one was not yet read. In this implementation, the FIFOs are not physically disabled, but the flags are manipulated to give the illusion of a 1-byte register. When the FIFOs are disabled, a write to the data register bypasses the holding register unless the transmit shift register is already in use.

## **4.2.3.2.6. System and diagnostic loopback testing**

You can perform loopback testing for UART data by setting the Loop Back Enable (LBE) bit to 1 in the Control Register, UARTCR.

Data transmitted on UARTTXD is received on the UARTRXD input.

## **4.2.3.3. UART character frame**

_Figure 61. UART character frame._

**==> picture [297 x 68] intentionally omitted <==**

## **4.2.4. UART hardware flow control**

The hardware flow control feature is fully selectable, and enables you to control the serial data flow by using the nUARTRTS output and nUARTCTS input signals. Figure 62 shows how two devices can communicate with each other using hardware flow control.

4.2. UART

**422**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 62. Hardware flow control between two similar devices._

**==> picture [297 x 116] intentionally omitted <==**

When the RTS flow control is enabled, nUARTRTS is asserted until the receive FIFO is filled up to the programmed watermark level. When the CTS flow control is enabled, the transmitter can only transmit data when nUARTCTS is asserted.

The hardware flow control is selectable using the RTSEn and CTSEn bits in the Control Register, UARTCR. Table 423 lists how you must set the bits to enable RTS and CTS flow control both simultaneously, and independently.

_Table 423. Control bits to enable and disable hardware flow control._

|**UARTCR Register bits**|**UARTCR Register bits**|**UARTCR Register bits**|
|---|---|---|
|**CTSEn**|**RTSEn**|**Description**|
|1|1|Both RTS and CTS flow control<br>enabled|
|1|0|Only CTS flow control enabled|
|0|1|Only RTS flow control enabled|
|0|0|Both RTS and CTS flow control<br>disabled|



##  **NOTE**

When RTS flow control is enabled, the software cannot use the RTSEn bit in the Control Register, UARTCR, to control the status of nUARTRTS.

## **4.2.4.1. RTS flow control**

The RTS flow control logic is linked to the programmable receive FIFO watermark levels. When RTS flow control is enabled, the nUARTRTS is asserted until the receive FIFO is filled up to the watermark level. When the receive FIFO watermark level is reached, the nUARTRTS signal is deasserted, indicating that there is no more room to receive any more data. The transmission of data is expected to cease after the current character has been transmitted.

The nUARTRTS signal is reasserted when data has been read out of the receive FIFO so that it is filled to less than the watermark level. If RTS flow control is disabled and the UART is still enabled, then data is received until the receive FIFO is full, or no more data is transmitted to it.

## **4.2.4.2. CTS flow control**

If CTS flow control is enabled, then the transmitter checks the nUARTCTS signal before transmitting the next byte. If the nUARTCTS signal is asserted, it transmits the byte otherwise transmission does not occur.

The data continues to be transmitted while nUARTCTS is asserted, and the transmit FIFO is not empty. If the transmit FIFO is empty and the nUARTCTS signal is asserted no data is transmitted.

If the nUARTCTS signal is deasserted and CTS flow control is enabled, then the current character transmission is completed before stopping. If CTS flow control is disabled and the UART is enabled, then the data continues to be transmitted until the transmit FIFO is empty.

4.2. UART

**423**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.5. UART DMA Interface**

The UART provides an interface to connect to a DMA controller. The DMA operation of the UART is controlled using the DMA Control Register, UARTDMACR. The DMA interface includes the following signals:

For receive:

## **UARTRXDMASREQ**

Single character DMA transfer request, asserted by the UART. For receive, one character consists of up to 12 bits. This signal is asserted when the receive FIFO contains at least one character.

## **UARTRXDMABREQ**

Burst DMA transfer request, asserted by the UART. This signal is asserted when the receive FIFO contains more characters than the programmed watermark level. You can program the watermark level for each FIFO using the Interrupt FIFO Level Select Register, UARTIFLS

## **UARTRXDMACLR**

DMA request clear, asserted by a DMA controller to clear the receive request signals. If DMA burst transfer is requested, the clear signal is asserted during the transfer of the last data in the burst.

For transmit:

## **UARTTXDMASREQ**

Single character DMA transfer request, asserted by the UART. For transmit one character consists of up to eight bits. This signal is asserted when there is at least one empty location in the transmit FIFO.

## **UARTTXDMABREQ**

Burst DMA transfer request, asserted by the UART. This signal is asserted when the transmit FIFO contains less characters than the watermark level. You can program the watermark level for each FIFO using the Interrupt FIFO Level Select Register, UARTIFLS.

## **UARTTXDMACLR**

DMA request clear, asserted by a DMA controller to clear the transmit request signals. If DMA burst transfer is requested, the clear signal is asserted during the transfer of the last data in the burst.

The burst transfer and single transfer request signals are not mutually exclusive, they can both be asserted at the same time. For example, when there is more data than the watermark level in the receive FIFO, the burst transfer request and the single transfer request are asserted. When the amount of data left in the receive FIFO is less than the watermark level, the single request only is asserted. This is useful for situations where the number of characters left to be received in the stream is less than a burst.

For example, if 19 characters have to be received and the watermark level is programmed to be four. The DMA controller then transfers four bursts of four characters and three single transfers to complete the stream.

##  **NOTE**

For the remaining three characters the UART cannot assert the burst request.

Each request signal remains asserted until the relevant DMACLR signal is asserted. After the request clear signal is deasserted, a request signal can become active again, depending on the conditions described previously. All request signals are deasserted if the UART is disabled or the relevant DMA enable bit, TXDMAE or RXDMAE, in the DMA Control Register, UARTDMACR, is cleared.

If you disable the FIFOs in the UART then it operates in character mode and only the DMA single transfer mode can operate, because only one character can be transferred to, or from the FIFOs at any time. UARTRXDMASREQ and UARTTXDMASREQ are the only request signals that can be asserted. See the Line Control Register, UARTLCR_H, for information about disabling the FIFOs.

When the UART is in the FIFO enabled mode, data transfers can be made by either single or burst transfers depending on the programmed watermark level and the amount of data in the FIFO. Table 424 lists the trigger points for UARTRXDMABREQ and UARTTXDMABREQ depending on the watermark level, for the transmit and receive FIFOs.

4.2. UART

**424**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 424. DMA_<br>_trigger points for the_<br>_transmit and receive_<br>_FIFOs._|**Watermark level**|**Burst length**|**Burst length**|
|---|---|---|---|
|||**Transmit (number of empty**<br>**locations)**|**Receive (number of filled locations)**|
||1/8|28|4|
||1/4|24|8|
||1/2|16|16|
||3/4|8|24|
||7/8|4|28|



In addition, the DMAONERR bit in the DMA Control Register, UARTDMACR, supports the use of the receive error interrupt, UARTEINTR. It enables the DMA receive request outputs, UARTRXDMASREQ or UARTRXDMABREQ, to be masked out when the UART error interrupt, UARTEINTR, is asserted. The DMA receive request outputs remain inactive until the UARTEINTR is cleared. The DMA transmit request outputs are unaffected.

_Figure 63. DMA transfer waveforms._

**==> picture [297 x 56] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 63 shows the timing diagram for both a single transfer request and a burst transfer request with the appropriate DMACLR signal. The signals are all synchronous to PCLK. For the sake of clarity it is assumed that there is no synchronization of the request signals in the DMA controller.

## **4.2.6. Interrupts**

There are eleven maskable interrupts generated in the UART. On RP2040, only the combined interrupt output, UARTINTR, is connected.

You can enable or disable the individual interrupts by changing the mask bits in the Interrupt Mask Set/Clear Register, UARTIMSC. Setting the appropriate mask bit HIGH enables the interrupt.

Provision of individual outputs and the combined interrupt output, enables you to use either a global interrupt service routine, or modular device drivers to handle interrupts.

The transmit and receive dataflow interrupts UARTRXINTR and UARTTXINTR have been separated from the status interrupts. This enables you to use UARTRXINTR and UARTTXINTR so that data can be read or written in response to the FIFO trigger levels.

The error interrupt, UARTEINTR, can be triggered when there is an error in the reception of data. A number of error conditions are possible.

The modem status interrupt, UARTMSINTR, is a combined interrupt of all the individual modem status signals.

The status of the individual interrupt sources can be read either from the Raw Interrupt Status Register, UARTRIS, or from the Masked Interrupt Status Register, UARTMIS.

## **4.2.6.1. UARTMSINTR**

The modem status interrupt is asserted if any of the modem status signals (nUARTCTS, nUARTDCD, nUARTDSR, and nUARTRI) change. It is cleared by writing a 1 to the corresponding bit(s) in the Interrupt Clear Register, UARTICR, depending on the modem status signals that generated the interrupt.

4.2. UART

**425**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.6.2. UARTRXINTR**

The receive interrupt changes state when one of the following events occurs:

- [If the FIFOs are enabled and the receive FIFO reaches the programmed trigger level. When this happens, the] receive interrupt is asserted HIGH. The receive interrupt is cleared by reading data from the receive FIFO until it becomes less than the trigger level, or by clearing the interrupt.

- [If the FIFOs are disabled (have a depth of one location) and data is received thereby filling the location, the receive] interrupt is asserted HIGH. The receive interrupt is cleared by performing a single read of the receive FIFO, or by clearing the interrupt.

## **4.2.6.3. UARTTXINTR**

The transmit interrupt changes state when one of the following events occurs:

- [If the FIFOs are enabled and the transmit FIFO is equal to or lower than the programmed trigger level then the] transmit interrupt is asserted HIGH. The transmit interrupt is cleared by writing data to the transmit FIFO until it becomes greater than the trigger level, or by clearing the interrupt.

- [If the FIFOs are disabled (have a depth of one location) and there is no data present in the transmitters single] location, the transmit interrupt is asserted HIGH. It is cleared by performing a single write to the transmit FIFO, or by clearing the interrupt.

To update the transmit FIFO you must:

- [Write data to the transmit FIFO, either prior to enabling the UART and the interrupts, or after enabling the UART and] interrupts.

##  **NOTE**

The transmit interrupt is based on a transition through a level, rather than on the level itself. When the interrupt and the UART is enabled before any data is written to the transmit FIFO the interrupt is not set. The interrupt is only set, after written data leaves the single location of the transmit FIFO and it becomes empty.

## **4.2.6.4. UARTRTINTR**

The receive timeout interrupt is asserted when the receive FIFO is not empty, and no more data is received during a 32bit period. The receive timeout interrupt is cleared either when the FIFO becomes empty through reading all the data (or by reading the holding register), or when a 1 is written to the corresponding bit of the Interrupt Clear Register, UARTICR.

## **4.2.6.5. UARTEINTR**

The error interrupt is asserted when an error occurs in the reception of data by the UART. The interrupt can be caused by a number of different error conditions:

- [framing]

- [parity]

- [break]

- [overrun.]

You can determine the cause of the interrupt by reading the Raw Interrupt Status Register, UARTRIS, or the Masked Interrupt Status Register, UARTMIS. It can be cleared by writing to the relevant bits of the Interrupt Clear Register, UARTICR (bits 7 to 10 are the error clear bits).

4.2. UART

**426**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.6.6. UARTINTR**

The interrupts are also combined into a single output, that is an OR function of the individual masked sources. You can connect this output to a system interrupt controller to provide another level of masking on a individual peripheral basis.

The combined UART interrupt is asserted if any of the individual interrupts are asserted and enabled.

## **4.2.7. Programmer’s Model**

The SDK provides a uart_init function to configure the UART with a particular baud rate. Once the UART is initialised, the user must configure a GPIO pin as UART_TX and UART_RX. See Section 2.19.5.1 for more information on selecting a GPIO function.

To initialise the UART, the uart_init function takes the following steps:

- [Deassert the reset]

- [Enable ][clk_peri]

- [Set enable bits in the control register]

- [Enable the FIFOs]

- [Set the baud rate divisors]

- [Set the format]

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_uart/uart.c Lines 42 - 92_

42 uint uart_init(uart_inst_t *uart, uint baudrate) { 43     invalid_params_if(HARDWARE_UART, uart != uart0 && uart != uart1); 44 45     if (uart_clock_get_hz(uart) == 0) { 46         return 0; 47     } 48 49     uart_reset(uart); 50     uart_unreset(uart); 51 52     uart_set_translate_crlf(uart, PICO_UART_DEFAULT_CRLF); 53 54 _// Any LCR writes need to take place before enabling the UART_ 55     uint baud = uart_set_baudrate(uart, baudrate); 56 57 _// inline the uart_set_format() call, as we don't need the CR disable/re-enable_ 58 _// protection, and also many people will never call it again, so having_ 59 _// the generic function is not useful, and much bigger than this inlined_ 60 _// code which is only a handful of instructions._ 61 _//_ 62 _// The UART_UARTLCR_H_FEN_BITS setting is combined as well as it is the same register_ 63 _#ifdef 0_ 64     uart_set_format(uart, 8, 1, UART_PARITY_NONE); 65 _// Enable FIFOs (must be before setting UARTEN, as this is an LCR access)_ 66     hw_set_bits(&uart_get_hw(uart)->lcr_h, UART_UARTLCR_H_FEN_BITS); 67 _#else_ 68     uint data_bits = 8; 69     uint stop_bits = 1; 70     uint parity = UART_PARITY_NONE; 71     hw_write_masked(&uart_get_hw(uart)->lcr_h, 72         ((data_bits - 5u) << UART_UARTLCR_H_WLEN_LSB) | 73             ((stop_bits - 1u) << UART_UARTLCR_H_STP2_LSB) | 74             (bool_to_bit(parity != UART_PARITY_NONE) << UART_UARTLCR_H_PEN_LSB) | 75             (bool_to_bit(parity == UART_PARITY_EVEN) << UART_UARTLCR_H_EPS_LSB) |

4.2. UART

**427**

RP2040 Datasheet

76             UART_UARTLCR_H_FEN_BITS, 77         UART_UARTLCR_H_WLEN_BITS | UART_UARTLCR_H_STP2_BITS | 78             UART_UARTLCR_H_PEN_BITS | UART_UARTLCR_H_EPS_BITS | 79             UART_UARTLCR_H_FEN_BITS); 80 _#endif_ 81 82 _// Enable the UART, both TX and RX_ 83     uart_get_hw(uart)->cr = UART_UARTCR_UARTEN_BITS | UART_UARTCR_TXE_BITS | UART_UARTCR_RXE_BITS; 84 _// Always enable DREQ signals -- no harm in this if DMA is not listening_ 85     uart_get_hw(uart)->dmacr = UART_UARTDMACR_TXDMAE_BITS | UART_UARTDMACR_RXDMAE_BITS; 86 87     return baud; 88 }

## **4.2.7.1. Baud Rate Calculation**

The uart baud rate is derived from dividing clk_peri. If the required baud rate is 115200 and UARTCLK = 125MHz then: Baud Rate Divisor = (125 * 10^6)/(16 * 115200) ~= 67.817 Therefore, BRDI = 67 and BRDF = 0.817, Therefore, fractional part, m = integer((0.817 * 64) + 0.5) = 52 Generated baud rate divider = 67 + 52/64 = 67.8125 Generated baud rate = (125 * 10^6)/(16 * 67.8125) ~= 115207 Error = (abs(115200 - 115207) / 115200) * 100 ~= 0.006%

_SDK: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/master/src/rp2_common/hardware_uart/uart.c Lines 155 - 180_

155 uint uart_set_baudrate(uart_inst_t *uart, uint baudrate) { 156     invalid_params_if(HARDWARE_UART, baudrate == 0); 157     uint32_t baud_rate_div = (8 * uart_clock_get_hz(uart) / baudrate) + 1; 158     uint32_t baud_ibrd = baud_rate_div >> 7; 159     uint32_t baud_fbrd; 160 161     if (baud_ibrd == 0) { 162         baud_ibrd = 1; 163         baud_fbrd = 0; 164     } else if (baud_ibrd >= 65535) { 165         baud_ibrd = 65535; 166         baud_fbrd = 0; 167     }  else { 168         baud_fbrd = (baud_rate_div & 0x7f) >> 1; 169     } 170 171     uart_get_hw(uart)->ibrd = baud_ibrd; 172     uart_get_hw(uart)->fbrd = baud_fbrd; 173 174 _// PL011 needs a (dummy) LCR_H write to latch in the divisors._ 175 _// We don't want to actually change LCR_H contents here._ 176     uart_write_lcr_bits_masked(uart, 0, 0); 177 178 _// See datasheet_ 179     return (4 * uart_clock_get_hz(uart)) / (64 * baud_ibrd + baud_fbrd); 180 }

4.2. UART

**428**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.2.8. List of Registers**

The UART0 and UART1 registers start at base addresses of 0x40034000 and 0x40038000 respectively (defined as UART0_BASE and UART1_BASE in SDK).

_Table 425. List of UART registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x000|UARTDR|Data Register, UARTDR|
|0x004|UARTRSR|Receive Status Register/Error Clear Register,<br>UARTRSR/UARTECR|
|0x018|UARTFR|Flag Register, UARTFR|
|0x020|UARTILPR|IrDA Low-Power Counter Register, UARTILPR|
|0x024|UARTIBRD|Integer Baud Rate Register, UARTIBRD|
|0x028|UARTFBRD|Fractional Baud Rate Register, UARTFBRD|
|0x02c|UARTLCR_H|Line Control Register, UARTLCR_H|
|0x030|UARTCR|Control Register, UARTCR|
|0x034|UARTIFLS|Interrupt FIFO Level Select Register, UARTIFLS|
|0x038|UARTIMSC|Interrupt Mask Set/Clear Register, UARTIMSC|
|0x03c|UARTRIS|Raw Interrupt Status Register, UARTRIS|
|0x040|UARTMIS|Masked Interrupt Status Register, UARTMIS|
|0x044|UARTICR|Interrupt Clear Register, UARTICR|
|0x048|UARTDMACR|DMA Control Register, UARTDMACR|
|0xfe0|UARTPERIPHID0|UARTPeriphID0 Register|
|0xfe4|UARTPERIPHID1|UARTPeriphID1 Register|
|0xfe8|UARTPERIPHID2|UARTPeriphID2 Register|
|0xfec|UARTPERIPHID3|UARTPeriphID3 Register|
|0xff0|UARTPCELLID0|UARTPCellID0 Register|
|0xff4|UARTPCELLID1|UARTPCellID1 Register|
|0xff8|UARTPCELLID2|UARTPCellID2 Register|
|0xffc|UARTPCELLID3|UARTPCellID3 Register|



## **UART: UARTDR Register**

**Offset** : 0x000

## **Description**

Data Register, UARTDR

_Table 426. UARTDR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11|**OE**: Overrun error. This bit is set to 1 if data is received and the receive FIFO is<br>already full. This is cleared to 0 once there is an empty space in the FIFO and a<br>new character can be written to it.|RO|-|



4.2. UART

**429**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|10|**BE**: Break error. This bit is set to 1 if a break condition was detected, indicating<br>that the received data input was held LOW for longer than a full-word<br>transmission time (defined as start, data, parity and stop bits). In FIFO mode,<br>this error is associated with the character at the top of the FIFO. When a break<br>occurs, only one 0 character is loaded into the FIFO. The next character is only<br>enabled after the receive data input goes to a 1 (marking state), and the next<br>valid start bit is received.|RO|-|
|9|**PE**: Parity error. When set to 1, it indicates that the parity of the received data<br>character does not match the parity that the EPS and SPS bits in the Line<br>Control Register, UARTLCR_H. In FIFO mode, this error is associated with the<br>character at the top of the FIFO.|RO|-|
|8|**FE**: Framing error. When set to 1, it indicates that the received character did<br>not have a valid stop bit (a valid stop bit is 1). In FIFO mode, this error is<br>associated with the character at the top of the FIFO.|RO|-|
|7:0|**DATA**: Receive (read) data character. Transmit (write) data character.|RWF|-|



## **UART: UARTRSR Register**

**Offset** : 0x004

## **Description**

Receive Status Register/Error Clear Register, UARTRSR/UARTECR

_Table 427. UARTRSR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3|**OE**: Overrun error. This bit is set to 1 if data is received and the FIFO is already<br>full. This bit is cleared to 0 by a write to UARTECR. The FIFO contents remain<br>valid because no more data is written when the FIFO is full, only the contents<br>of the shift register are overwritten. The CPU must now read the data, to<br>empty the FIFO.|WC|0x0|
|2|**BE**: Break error. This bit is set to 1 if a break condition was detected, indicating<br>that the received data input was held LOW for longer than a full-word<br>transmission time (defined as start, data, parity, and stop bits). This bit is<br>cleared to 0 after a write to UARTECR. In FIFO mode, this error is associated<br>with the character at the top of the FIFO. When a break occurs, only one 0<br>character is loaded into the FIFO. The next character is only enabled after the<br>receive data input goes to a 1 (marking state) and the next valid start bit is<br>received.|WC|0x0|
|1|**PE**: Parity error. When set to 1, it indicates that the parity of the received data<br>character does not match the parity that the EPS and SPS bits in the Line<br>Control Register, UARTLCR_H. This bit is cleared to 0 by a write to UARTECR.<br>In FIFO mode, this error is associated with the character at the top of the FIFO.|WC|0x0|
|0|**FE**: Framing error. When set to 1, it indicates that the received character did<br>not have a valid stop bit (a valid stop bit is 1). This bit is cleared to 0 by a write<br>to UARTECR. In FIFO mode, this error is associated with the character at the<br>top of the FIFO.|WC|0x0|



## **UART: UARTFR Register**

**Offset** : 0x018

4.2. UART

**430**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Flag Register, UARTFR

|_Table 428. UARTFR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:9|Reserved.|-|-|
||8|**RI**: Ring indicator. This bit is the complement of the UART ring indicator,<br>nUARTRI, modem status input. That is, the bit is 1 when nUARTRI is LOW.|RO|-|
||7|**TXFE**: Transmit FIFO empty. The meaning of this bit depends on the state of<br>the FEN bit in the Line Control Register, UARTLCR_H. If the FIFO is disabled,<br>this bit is set when the transmit holding register is empty. If the FIFO is<br>enabled, the TXFE bit is set when the transmit FIFO is empty. This bit does not<br>indicate if there is data in the transmit shift register.|RO|0x1|
||6|**RXFF**: Receive FIFO full. The meaning of this bit depends on the state of the<br>FEN bit in the UARTLCR_H Register. If the FIFO is disabled, this bit is set when<br>the receive holding register is full. If the FIFO is enabled, the RXFF bit is set<br>when the receive FIFO is full.|RO|0x0|
||5|**TXFF**: Transmit FIFO full. The meaning of this bit depends on the state of the<br>FEN bit in the UARTLCR_H Register. If the FIFO is disabled, this bit is set when<br>the transmit holding register is full. If the FIFO is enabled, the TXFF bit is set<br>when the transmit FIFO is full.|RO|0x0|
||4|**RXFE**: Receive FIFO empty. The meaning of this bit depends on the state of the<br>FEN bit in the UARTLCR_H Register. If the FIFO is disabled, this bit is set when<br>the receive holding register is empty. If the FIFO is enabled, the RXFE bit is set<br>when the receive FIFO is empty.|RO|0x1|
||3|**BUSY**: UART busy. If this bit is set to 1, the UART is busy transmitting data.<br>This bit remains set until the complete byte, including all the stop bits, has<br>been sent from the shift register. This bit is set as soon as the transmit FIFO<br>becomes non-empty, regardless of whether the UART is enabled or not.|RO|0x0|
||2|**DCD**: Data carrier detect. This bit is the complement of the UART data carrier<br>detect, nUARTDCD, modem status input. That is, the bit is 1 when nUARTDCD<br>is LOW.|RO|-|
||1|**DSR**: Data set ready. This bit is the complement of the UART data set ready,<br>nUARTDSR, modem status input. That is, the bit is 1 when nUARTDSR is LOW.|RO|-|
||0|**CTS**: Clear to send. This bit is the complement of the UART clear to send,<br>nUARTCTS, modem status input. That is, the bit is 1 when nUARTCTS is LOW.|RO|-|



## **UART: UARTILPR Register**

**Offset** : 0x020

## **Description**

IrDA Low-Power Counter Register, UARTILPR

|_Table 429. UARTILPR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**ILPDVSR**: 8-bit low-power divisor value. These bits are cleared to 0 at reset.|RW|0x00|



## **UART: UARTIBRD Register**

**Offset** : 0x024

4.2. UART

**431**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Integer Baud Rate Register, UARTIBRD

|_Table 430. UARTIBRD_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|**BAUD_DIVINT**: The integer baud rate divisor. These bits are cleared to 0 on<br>reset.|RW|0x0000|



## **UART: UARTFBRD Register**

**Offset** : 0x028

## **Description**

Fractional Baud Rate Register, UARTFBRD

|_Table 431. UARTFBRD_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:0|**BAUD_DIVFRAC**: The fractional baud rate divisor. These bits are cleared to 0<br>on reset.|RW|0x00|



## **UART: UARTLCR_H Register**

**Offset** : 0x02c

## **Description**

Line Control Register, UARTLCR_H

|_Table 432._<br>_UARTLCR_H Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7|**SPS**: Stick parity select. 0 = stick parity is disabled 1 = either: * if the EPS bit is<br>0 then the parity bit is transmitted and checked as a 1 * if the EPS bit is 1 then<br>the parity bit is transmitted and checked as a 0. This bit has no effect when<br>the PEN bit disables parity checking and generation.|RW|0x0|
||6:5|**WLEN**: Word length. These bits indicate the number of data bits transmitted or<br>received in a frame as follows: b11 = 8 bits b10 = 7 bits b01 = 6 bits b00 = 5<br>bits.|RW|0x0|
||4|**FEN**: Enable FIFOs: 0 = FIFOs are disabled (character mode) that is, the FIFOs<br>become 1-byte-deep holding registers 1 = transmit and receive FIFO buffers<br>are enabled (FIFO mode).|RW|0x0|
||3|**STP2**: Two stop bits select. If this bit is set to 1, two stop bits are transmitted<br>at the end of the frame. The receive logic does not check for two stop bits<br>being received.|RW|0x0|
||2|**EPS**: Even parity select. Controls the type of parity the UART uses during<br>transmission and reception: 0 = odd parity. The UART generates or checks for<br>an odd number of 1s in the data and parity bits. 1 = even parity. The UART<br>generates or checks for an even number of 1s in the data and parity bits. This<br>bit has no effect when the PEN bit disables parity checking and generation.|RW|0x0|
||1|**PEN**: Parity enable: 0 = parity is disabled and no parity bit added to the data<br>frame 1 = parity checking and generation is enabled.|RW|0x0|



4.2. UART

**432**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|**BRK**: Send break. If this bit is set to 1, a low-level is continually output on the<br>UARTTXD output, after completing transmission of the current character. For<br>the proper execution of the break command, the software must set this bit for<br>at least two complete frames. For normal use, this bit must be cleared to 0.|RW|0x0|



## **UART: UARTCR Register**

**Offset** : 0x030

## **Description**

Control Register, UARTCR

_Table 433. UARTCR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15|**CTSEN**: CTS hardware flow control enable. If this bit is set to 1, CTS hardware<br>flow control is enabled. Data is only transmitted when the nUARTCTS signal is<br>asserted.|RW|0x0|
|14|**RTSEN**: RTS hardware flow control enable. If this bit is set to 1, RTS hardware<br>flow control is enabled. Data is only requested when there is space in the<br>receive FIFO for it to be received.|RW|0x0|
|13|**OUT2**: This bit is the complement of the UART Out2 (nUARTOut2) modem<br>status output. That is, when the bit is programmed to a 1, the output is 0. For<br>DTE this can be used as Ring Indicator (RI).|RW|0x0|
|12|**OUT1**: This bit is the complement of the UART Out1 (nUARTOut1) modem<br>status output. That is, when the bit is programmed to a 1 the output is 0. For<br>DTE this can be used as Data Carrier Detect (DCD).|RW|0x0|
|11|**RTS**: Request to send. This bit is the complement of the UART request to<br>send, nUARTRTS, modem status output. That is, when the bit is programmed<br>to a 1 then nUARTRTS is LOW.|RW|0x0|
|10|**DTR**: Data transmit ready. This bit is the complement of the UART data<br>transmit ready, nUARTDTR, modem status output. That is, when the bit is<br>programmed to a 1 then nUARTDTR is LOW.|RW|0x0|
|9|**RXE**: Receive enable. If this bit is set to 1, the receive section of the UART is<br>enabled. Data reception occurs for either UART signals or SIR signals<br>depending on the setting of the SIREN bit. When the UART is disabled in the<br>middle of reception, it completes the current character before stopping.|RW|0x1|
|8|**TXE**: Transmit enable. If this bit is set to 1, the transmit section of the UART is<br>enabled. Data transmission occurs for either UART signals, or SIR signals<br>depending on the setting of the SIREN bit. When the UART is disabled in the<br>middle of transmission, it completes the current character before stopping.|RW|0x1|



4.2. UART

**433**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|7|**LBE**: Loopback enable. If this bit is set to 1 and the SIREN bit is set to 1 and<br>the SIRTEST bit in the Test Control Register, UARTTCR is set to 1, then the<br>nSIROUT path is inverted, and fed through to the SIRIN path. The SIRTEST bit<br>in the test register must be set to 1 to override the normal half-duplex SIR<br>operation. This must be the requirement for accessing the test registers<br>during normal operation, and SIRTEST must be cleared to 0 when loopback<br>testing is finished. This feature reduces the amount of external coupling<br>required during system test. If this bit is set to 1, and the SIRTEST bit is set to<br>0, the UARTTXD path is fed through to the UARTRXD path. In either SIR mode<br>or UART mode, when this bit is set, the modem outputs are also fed through to<br>the modem inputs. This bit is cleared to 0 on reset, to disable loopback.|RW|0x0|
|6:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**SIRLP**: SIR low-power IrDA mode. This bit selects the IrDA encoding mode. If<br>this bit is cleared to 0, low-level bits are transmitted as an active high pulse<br>with a width of 3 / 16th of the bit period. If this bit is set to 1, low-level bits are<br>transmitted with a pulse width that is 3 times the period of the IrLPBaud16<br>input signal, regardless of the selected bit rate. Setting this bit uses less<br>power, but might reduce transmission distances.|RW|0x0|
|1|**SIREN**: SIR enable: 0 = IrDA SIR ENDEC is disabled. nSIROUT remains LOW (no<br>light pulse generated), and signal transitions on SIRIN have no effect. 1 = IrDA<br>SIR ENDEC is enabled. Data is transmitted and received on nSIROUT and<br>SIRIN. UARTTXD remains HIGH, in the marking state. Signal transitions on<br>UARTRXD or modem status inputs have no effect. This bit has no effect if the<br>UARTEN bit disables the UART.|RW|0x0|
|0|**UARTEN**: UART enable: 0 = UART is disabled. If the UART is disabled in the<br>middle of transmission or reception, it completes the current character before<br>stopping. 1 = the UART is enabled. Data transmission and reception occurs for<br>either UART signals or SIR signals depending on the setting of the SIREN bit.|RW|0x0|



## **UART: UARTIFLS Register**

**Offset** : 0x034

## **Description**

Interrupt FIFO Level Select Register, UARTIFLS

|_Table 434. UARTIFLS_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5:3|**RXIFLSEL**: Receive interrupt FIFO level select. The trigger points for the receive<br>interrupt are as follows: b000 = Receive FIFO becomes >= 1 / 8 full b001 =<br>Receive FIFO becomes >= 1 / 4 full b010 = Receive FIFO becomes >= 1 / 2 full<br>b011 = Receive FIFO becomes >= 3 / 4 full b100 = Receive FIFO becomes >= 7<br>/ 8 full b101-b111 = reserved.|RW|0x2|
||2:0|**TXIFLSEL**: Transmit interrupt FIFO level select. The trigger points for the<br>transmit interrupt are as follows: b000 = Transmit FIFO becomes <= 1 / 8 full<br>b001 = Transmit FIFO becomes <= 1 / 4 full b010 = Transmit FIFO becomes <=<br>1 / 2 full b011 = Transmit FIFO becomes <= 3 / 4 full b100 = Transmit FIFO<br>becomes <= 7 / 8 full b101-b111 = reserved.|RW|0x2|



## **UART: UARTIMSC Register**

4.2. UART

**434**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Offset** : 0x038

## **Description**

Interrupt Mask Set/Clear Register, UARTIMSC

|_Table 435. UARTIMSC_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:11|Reserved.|-|-|
||10|**OEIM**: Overrun error interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTOEINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTOEINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||9|**BEIM**: Break error interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTBEINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTBEINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||8|**PEIM**: Parity error interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTPEINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTPEINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||7|**FEIM**: Framing error interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTFEINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTFEINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||6|**RTIM**: Receive timeout interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTRTINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTRTINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||5|**TXIM**: Transmit interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTTXINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTTXINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||4|**RXIM**: Receive interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for the<br>UARTRXINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTRXINTR interrupt<br>is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||3|**DSRMIM**: nUARTDSR modem interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask<br>for the UARTDSRINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the<br>UARTDSRINTR interrupt is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||2|**DCDMIM**: nUARTDCD modem interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask<br>for the UARTDCDINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the<br>UARTDCDINTR interrupt is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||1|**CTSMIM**: nUARTCTS modem interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask<br>for the UARTCTSINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the<br>UARTCTSINTR interrupt is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|
||0|**RIMIM**: nUARTRI modem interrupt mask. A read returns the current mask for<br>the UARTRIINTR interrupt. On a write of 1, the mask of the UARTRIINTR<br>interrupt is set. A write of 0 clears the mask.|RW|0x0|



## **UART: UARTRIS Register**

**Offset** : 0x03c

## **Description**

Raw Interrupt Status Register, UARTRIS

|_Table 436. UARTRIS_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:11|Reserved.|-|-|



4.2. UART

**435**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|10|**OERIS**: Overrun error interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTOEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|9|**BERIS**: Break error interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTBEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|8|**PERIS**: Parity error interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTPEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|7|**FERIS**: Framing error interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTFEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|6|**RTRIS**: Receive timeout interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTRTINTR interrupt. a|RO|0x0|
|5|**TXRIS**: Transmit interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTTXINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|4|**RXRIS**: Receive interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of the<br>UARTRXINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|3|**DSRRMIS**: nUARTDSR modem interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state<br>of the UARTDSRINTR interrupt.|RO|-|
|2|**DCDRMIS**: nUARTDCD modem interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state<br>of the UARTDCDINTR interrupt.|RO|-|
|1|**CTSRMIS**: nUARTCTS modem interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state<br>of the UARTCTSINTR interrupt.|RO|-|
|0|**RIRMIS**: nUARTRI modem interrupt status. Returns the raw interrupt state of<br>the UARTRIINTR interrupt.|RO|-|



## **UART: UARTMIS Register**

**Offset** : 0x040

## **Description**

Masked Interrupt Status Register, UARTMIS

_Table 437. UARTMIS Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:11|Reserved.|-|-|
|10|**OEMIS**: Overrun error masked interrupt status. Returns the masked interrupt<br>state of the UARTOEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|9|**BEMIS**: Break error masked interrupt status. Returns the masked interrupt<br>state of the UARTBEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|8|**PEMIS**: Parity error masked interrupt status. Returns the masked interrupt<br>state of the UARTPEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|7|**FEMIS**: Framing error masked interrupt status. Returns the masked interrupt<br>state of the UARTFEINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|6|**RTMIS**: Receive timeout masked interrupt status. Returns the masked<br>interrupt state of the UARTRTINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|5|**TXMIS**: Transmit masked interrupt status. Returns the masked interrupt state<br>of the UARTTXINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|



4.2. UART

**436**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|4|**RXMIS**: Receive masked interrupt status. Returns the masked interrupt state<br>of the UARTRXINTR interrupt.|RO|0x0|
|3|**DSRMMIS**: nUARTDSR modem masked interrupt status. Returns the masked<br>interrupt state of the UARTDSRINTR interrupt.|RO|-|
|2|**DCDMMIS**: nUARTDCD modem masked interrupt status. Returns the masked<br>interrupt state of the UARTDCDINTR interrupt.|RO|-|
|1|**CTSMMIS**: nUARTCTS modem masked interrupt status. Returns the masked<br>interrupt state of the UARTCTSINTR interrupt.|RO|-|
|0|**RIMMIS**: nUARTRI modem masked interrupt status. Returns the masked<br>interrupt state of the UARTRIINTR interrupt.|RO|-|



## **UART: UARTICR Register**

**Offset** : 0x044

## **Description**

Interrupt Clear Register, UARTICR

_Table 438. UARTICR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:11|Reserved.|-|-|
|10|**OEIC**: Overrun error interrupt clear. Clears the UARTOEINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|9|**BEIC**: Break error interrupt clear. Clears the UARTBEINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|8|**PEIC**: Parity error interrupt clear. Clears the UARTPEINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|7|**FEIC**: Framing error interrupt clear. Clears the UARTFEINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|6|**RTIC**: Receive timeout interrupt clear. Clears the UARTRTINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|5|**TXIC**: Transmit interrupt clear. Clears the UARTTXINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|4|**RXIC**: Receive interrupt clear. Clears the UARTRXINTR interrupt.|WC|-|
|3|**DSRMIC**: nUARTDSR modem interrupt clear. Clears the UARTDSRINTR<br>interrupt.|WC|-|
|2|**DCDMIC**: nUARTDCD modem interrupt clear. Clears the UARTDCDINTR<br>interrupt.|WC|-|
|1|**CTSMIC**: nUARTCTS modem interrupt clear. Clears the UARTCTSINTR<br>interrupt.|WC|-|
|0|**RIMIC**: nUARTRI modem interrupt clear. Clears the UARTRIINTR interrupt.|WC|-|



## **UART: UARTDMACR Register**

**Offset** : 0x048

## **Description**

DMA Control Register, UARTDMACR

_Table 439. UARTDMACR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:3|Reserved.|-|-|



4.2. UART

**437**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|**DMAONERR**: DMA on error. If this bit is set to 1, the DMA receive request<br>outputs, UARTRXDMASREQ or UARTRXDMABREQ, are disabled when the<br>UART error interrupt is asserted.|RW|0x0|
|1|**TXDMAE**: Transmit DMA enable. If this bit is set to 1, DMA for the transmit<br>FIFO is enabled.|RW|0x0|
|0|**RXDMAE**: Receive DMA enable. If this bit is set to 1, DMA for the receive FIFO<br>is enabled.|RW|0x0|



## **UART: UARTPERIPHID0 Register**

**Offset** : 0xfe0

## **Description**

UARTPeriphID0 Register

|_Table 440._<br>_UARTPERIPHID0_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**PARTNUMBER0**: These bits read back as 0x11|RO|0x11|



## **UART: UARTPERIPHID1 Register**

**Offset** : 0xfe4

## **Description**

UARTPeriphID1 Register

|_Table 441._<br>_UARTPERIPHID1_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:4|**DESIGNER0**: These bits read back as 0x1|RO|0x1|
||3:0|**PARTNUMBER1**: These bits read back as 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **UART: UARTPERIPHID2 Register**

**Offset** : 0xfe8

## **Description**

UARTPeriphID2 Register

|_Table 442._<br>_UARTPERIPHID2_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:4|**REVISION**: This field depends on the revision of the UART: r1p0 0x0 r1p1 0x1<br>r1p3 0x2 r1p4 0x2 r1p5 0x3|RO|0x3|
||3:0|**DESIGNER1**: These bits read back as 0x4|RO|0x4|



## **UART: UARTPERIPHID3 Register**

**Offset** : 0xfec

**Description**

UARTPeriphID3 Register

4.2. UART

**438**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 443._<br>_UARTPERIPHID3_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 444._<br>_UARTPCELLID0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 445._<br>_UARTPCELLID1_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 446._<br>_UARTPCELLID2_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 447._<br>_UARTPCELLID3_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**CONFIGURATION**: These bits read back as 0x00|RO|0x00|
||**UART: UARTPCELLID0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0xff0<br>**Description**<br>UARTPCellID0 Register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**UARTPCELLID0**: These bits read back as 0x0D|RO|0x0d|
||**UART: UARTPCELLID1 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0xff4<br>**Description**<br>UARTPCellID1 Register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**UARTPCELLID1**: These bits read back as 0xF0|RO|0xf0|
||**UART: UARTPCELLID2 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0xff8<br>**Description**<br>UARTPCellID2 Register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**UARTPCELLID2**: These bits read back as 0x05|RO|0x05|
||**UART: UARTPCELLID3 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0xffc<br>**Description**<br>UARTPCellID3 Register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**UARTPCELLID3**: These bits read back as 0xB1|RO|0xb1|



4.2. UART

**439**

RP2040 Datasheet
