## **4.3. I2C**

**Synopsys Documentation** Synopsys Proprietary. Used with permission.

I2C is a commonly used 2-wire interface that can be used to connect devices for low speed data transfer using clock SCL and data SDA wires.

RP2040 has two identical instances of an I2C controller. The external pins of each controller are connected to GPIO pins as defined in the GPIO muxing table in Section 2.19.2. The muxing options give some IO flexibility.

## **4.3.1. Features**

Each I2C controller is based on a configuration of the Synopsys DW_apb_i2c (v2.01) IP. The following features are supported:

- [Master or Slave (Default to Master mode)]

- [Standard mode, Fast mode or Fast mode plus]

- [Default slave address 0x055]

- [Supports 10-bit addressing in Master mode]

- [16-element transmit buffer]

- [16-element receive buffer]

- [Can be driven from DMA]

- [Can generate interrupts]

## **4.3.1.1. Standard**

The I2C controller was designed for I2C Bus specification, version 6.0, dated April 2014.

## **4.3.1.2. Clocking**

All clocks in the I2C controller are connected to clk_sys, including ic_clk which is mentioned in later sections. The I2C clock is generated by dividing down this clock, controlled by registers inside the block.

## **4.3.1.3. IOs**

Each controller must connect its clock SCL and data SDA to one pair of GPIOs. The I2C standard requires that drivers drive a signal low, or when not driven the signal will be pulled high. This applies to SCL and SDA. The GPIO pads should be configured for:

- [pull-up enabled]

- [slew rate limited]

- [schmitt trigger enabled]

4.3. I2C

**440**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

There should also be external pull-ups on the board as the internal pad pull-ups may not be strong enough to pull up external circuits.

## **4.3.2. IP Configuration**

I2C configuration details (each instance is fully independent):

- [32-bit APB access]

- [Supports Standard mode, Fast mode or Fast mode plus (not High speed)]

- [Default slave address of 0x055]

- [Master or Slave mode]

- [Master by default (Slave mode disabled at reset)]

- [10-bit addressing supported in master mode (7-bit by default)]

- [16 entry transmit buffer]

- [16 entry receive buffer]

- [Allows restart conditions when a master (can be disabled for legacy device support)]

- [Configurable timing to adjust TsuDAT/ThDAT]

- [General calls responded to on reset]

- [Interface to DMA]

- [Single interrupt output]

- [Configurable timing to adjust clock frequency]

- [Spike suppression (default 7 clk_sys cycles)]

- [Can NACK after data received by Slave]

- [Hold transfer when TX FIFO empty]

- [Hold bus until space available in RX FIFO]

- [Restart detect interrupt in Slave mode]

- [Optional blocking Master commands (not enabled by default)]

## **4.3.3. I2C Overview**

The I2C bus is a 2-wire serial interface, consisting of a serial data line SDA and a serial clock SCL. These wires carry information between the devices connected to the bus. Each device is recognized by a unique address and can operate as either a “transmitter” or “receiver”, depending on the function of the device. Devices can also be considered as masters or slaves when performing data transfers. A master is a device that initiates a data transfer on the bus and generates the clock signals to permit that transfer. At that time, any device addressed is considered a slave.

4.3. I2C

**441**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

The I2C block must only be programmed to operate in either master OR slave mode only. Operating as a master and slave simultaneously is not supported.

The I2C block can operate in these modes:

- [standard mode (with data rates from 0 to 100kbps),]

- [fast mode (with data rates less than or equal to 400kbps),]

- [fast mode plus (with data rates less than or equal to 1000kbps).]

These modes are not supported:

- [High-speed mode (with data rates less than or equal to 3.4Mbps),]

- [Ultra-Fast Speed Mode (with data rates less than or equal to 5Mbps).]

##  **NOTE**

References to fast mode also apply to fast mode plus, unless specifically stated otherwise.

The I2C block can communicate with devices in one of these modes as long as they are attached to the bus. Additionally, fast mode devices are downward compatible. For instance, fast mode devices can communicate with standard mode devices in 0 to 100kbps I2C bus system. However standard mode devices are not upward compatible and should not be incorporated in a fast-mode I2C bus system as they cannot follow the higher transfer rate and unpredictable states would occur.

An example of high-speed mode devices are LCD displays, high-bit count ADCs, and high capacity EEPROMs. These devices typically need to transfer large amounts of data. Most maintenance and control applications, the common use for the I2C bus, typically operate at 100kHz (in standard and fast modes). Any DW_apb_i2c device can be attached to an I2C-bus and every device can talk with any master, passing information back and forth. There needs to be at least one master (such as a microcontroller or DSP) on the bus but there can be multiple masters, which require them to arbitrate for ownership. Multiple masters and arbitration are explained later in this chapter. The I2C block does not support SMBus and PMBus protocols (for System Management and Power management).

The DW_apb_i2c is made up of an AMBA APB slave interface, an I2C interface, and FIFO logic to maintain coherency between the two interfaces. The blocks of the component are illustrated in Figure 64.

_Figure 64. I2C Block diagram_

**==> picture [298 x 192] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
DW_apb_i2c<br>AMBA Bus  Slave State  Master State<br>Register File<br>Interface Unit Machine Machine<br>Clock Generator Rx Shift Tx Shift Rx Filter<br>Interrupt<br>Toggle Synchronizer DMA Interface<br>Controller<br>RX FIFO TX FIFO<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The following define the functions of the blocks in Figure 64:

- **[AMBA Bus Interface Unit]**[ — Takes the APB interface signals and translates them into a common generic interface] that allows the register file to be bus protocol-agnostic.

4.3. I2C

**442**

RP2040 Datasheet

- **[Register File]**[ — Contains configuration registers and is the interface with software.]

- **[Slave State Machine]**[ — Follows the protocol for a slave and monitors bus for address match.]

- **[Master State Machine]**[ — Generates the I2C protocol for the master transfers.]

- **[Clock Generator]**[ — Calculates the required timing to do the following:]

   - [Generate the ][SCL][ clock when configured as a master]

   - [Check for bus idle]

   - [Generate a START and a STOP]

   - [Setup the data and hold the data]

- **[Rx Shift]**[ — Takes data into the design and extracts it in byte format.]

- **[Tx Shift]**[ — Presents data supplied by CPU for transfer on the I2C bus.]

- **[Rx Filter]**[ — Detects the events in the bus; for example, start, stop and arbitration lost.]

- **[Toggle]**[ — Generates pulses on both sides and toggles to transfer signals across clock domains.]

- **[Synchronizer]**[ — Transfers signals from one clock domain to another.]

- **[DMA Interface]**[ — Generates the handshaking signals to the central DMA controller in order to automate the data] transfer without CPU intervention.

- **[Interrupt Controller]**[ — Generates the raw interrupt and interrupt flags, allowing them to be set and cleared.]

- **[RX FIFO]**[/] **[TX FIFO]**[ — Holds the RX FIFO and TX FIFO register banks and controllers, along with their status levels.]

## **4.3.4. I2C Terminology**

The following terms are used and are defined as follows:

## **4.3.4.1. I2C Bus Terms**

The following terms relate to how the role of the I2C device and how it interacts with other I2C devices on the bus.

- **[Transmitter]**[ – the device that sends data to the bus. A transmitter can either be a device that initiates the data] transmission to the bus (a master-transmitter) or responds to a request from the master to send data to the bus (a slave-transmitter).

- **[Receiver]**[ – the device that receives data from the bus. A receiver can either be a device that receives data on its] own request (a master-receiver) or in response to a request from the master (a slave-receiver).

- **[Master]**[ – the component that initializes a transfer (START command), generates the clock ][SCL][ signal and] terminates the transfer (STOP command). A master can be either a transmitter or a receiver.

- **[Slave]**[ – the device addressed by the master. A slave can be either receiver or transmitter.]

- **[Multi-master]**[ – the ability for more than one master to co-exist on the bus at the same time without collision or] data loss.

- **[Arbitration]**[ – the predefined procedure that authorizes only one master at a time to take control of the bus. For] more information about this behaviour, refer to Section 4.3.8.

- **[Synchronization]**[ – the predefined procedure that synchronizes the clock signals provided by two or more masters.] For more information about this feature, refer to Section 4.3.9.

- [SDA][ – data signal line (Serial Data)]

- [SCL][ – clock signal line (Serial Clock)]

4.3. I2C

**443**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.3.4.2. Bus Transfer Terms**

The following terms are specific to data transfers that occur to/from the I2C bus.

- **[START (RESTART)]**[ – data transfer begins with a START or RESTART condition. The level of the ][SDA][ data line] changes from high to low, while the SCL clock line remains high. When this occurs, the bus becomes busy.

##  **NOTE**

START and RESTART conditions are functionally identical.

- **[STOP]**[ – data transfer is terminated by a STOP condition. This occurs when the level on the ][SDA][ data line passes] from the low state to the high state, while the SCL clock line remains high. When the data transfer has been terminated, the bus is free or idle once again. The bus stays busy if a RESTART is generated instead of a STOP condition.

## **4.3.5. I2C Behaviour**

The DW_apb_i2c can be controlled via software to be either:

- [An I2C master only, communicating with other I2C slaves; OR]

- [An I2C slave only, communicating with one or more I2C masters.]

The master is responsible for generating the clock and controlling the transfer of data. The slave is responsible for either transmitting or receiving data to/from the master. The acknowledgement of data is sent by the device that is receiving data, which can be either a master or a slave. As mentioned previously, the I2C protocol also allows multiple masters to reside on the I2C bus and uses an arbitration procedure to determine bus ownership.

Each slave has a unique address that is determined by the system designer. When a master wants to communicate with a slave, the master transmits a START/RESTART condition that is then followed by the slave’s address and a control bit (R/W) to determine if the master wants to transmit data or receive data from the slave. The slave then sends an acknowledge (ACK) pulse after the address.

If the master (master-transmitter) is writing to the slave (slave-receiver), the receiver gets one byte of data. This transaction continues until the master terminates the transmission with a STOP condition. If the master is reading from a slave (master-receiver), the slave transmits (slave-transmitter) a byte of data to the master, and the master then acknowledges the transaction with the ACK pulse. This transaction continues until the master terminates the transmission by not acknowledging (NACK) the transaction after the last byte is received, and then the master issues a STOP condition or addresses another slave after issuing a RESTART condition. This behaviour is illustrated in Figure 65.

_Figure 65. Data transfer on the I2C Bus_

**==> picture [297 x 77] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
P<br>orR<br>SDA MSB LSB ACK ACK<br>from slave from receiver<br>SCL orRS 1 2 7 8 9 1 2 3-8 9 orPR<br>SCL held low while<br>servicing interrupts<br>START or RESTART Condition Byte Complete Interrupt within Slave STOP AND RESTART Condition<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The DW_apb_i2c is a synchronous serial interface. The SDA line is a bidirectional signal and changes only while the SCL line is low, except for STOP, START, and RESTART conditions. The output drivers are open-drain or open-collector to perform wire-AND functions on the bus. The maximum number of devices on the bus is limited by only the maximum capacitance specification of 400 pF. Data is transmitted in byte packages.

The I2C protocols implemented in DW_apb_i2c are described in more details in Section 4.3.6.

## **4.3.5.1. START and STOP Generation**

When operating as an I2C master, putting data into the transmit FIFO causes the DW_apb_i2c to generate a START condition on the I2C bus. Writing a 1 to IC_DATA_CMD.STOP causes the DW_apb_i2c to generate a STOP condition on

4.3. I2C

**444**

RP2040 Datasheet

the I2C bus; a STOP condition is not issued if this bit is not set, even if the transmit FIFO is empty.

When operating as a slave, the DW_apb_i2c does not generate START and STOP conditions, as per the protocol. However, if a read request is made to the DW_apb_i2c, it holds the SCL line low until read data has been supplied to it. This stalls the I2C bus until read data is provided to the slave DW_apb_i2c, or the DW_apb_i2c slave is disabled by writing a 0 to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.

## **4.3.5.2. Combined Formats**

The DW_apb_i2c supports mixed read and write combined format transactions in both 7-bit and 10-bit addressing modes. The DW_apb_i2c does not support mixed address and mixed address format—that is, a 7-bit address transaction followed by a 10-bit address transaction or vice versa—combined format transactions. To initiate combined format transfers, IC_CON.IC_RESTART_EN should be set to 1. With this value set and operating as a master, when the DW_apb_i2c completes an I2C transfer, it checks the transmit FIFO and executes the next transfer. If the direction of this transfer differs from the previous transfer, the combined format is used to issue the transfer. If the transmit FIFO is empty when the current I2C transfer completes:

- [IC_DATA_CMD][.STOP is checked and:]

   - [If set to 1, a STOP bit is issued.]

   - [If set to 0, the ][SCL][ is held low until the next command is written to the transmit FIFO.]

For more details, refer to Section 4.3.7.

## **4.3.6. I2C Protocols**

The DW_apb_i2c has the protocols discussed in this section.

## **4.3.6.1. START and STOP Conditions**

When the bus is idle, both the SCL and SDA signals are pulled high through external pull-up resistors on the bus. When the master wants to start a transmission on the bus, the master issues a START condition. This is defined to be a high-tolow transition of the SDA signal while SCL is 1. When the master wants to terminate the transmission, the master issues a STOP condition. This is defined to be a low-to-high transition of the SDA line while SCL is 1. Figure 66 shows the timing of the START and STOP conditions. When data is being transmitted on the bus, the SDA line must be stable when SCL is 1.

_Figure 66. I2C START and STOP Condition_

**==> picture [297 x 72] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
SDA<br>SCL<br>S P<br>Start Condition Change of Data Allowed Data line Stable Data Valid Change of Data  Stop Condition<br>Allowed<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


##  **NOTE**

The signal transitions for the START/STOP conditions, as depicted in Figure 66, reflect those observed at the output signals of the Master driving the I2C bus. Care should be taken when observing the SDA/SCL signals at the input signals of the Slave(s), because unequal line delays may result in an incorrect SDA/SCL timing relationship.

## **4.3.6.2. Addressing Slave Protocol**

There are two address formats: the 7-bit address format and the 10-bit address format.

4.3. I2C

**445**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.3.6.2.1. 7-bit Address Format**

During the 7-bit address format, the first seven bits (bits 7:1) of the first byte set the slave address and the LSB bit (bit 0) is the R/W bit as shown in Figure 67. When bit 0 (R/W) is set to 0, the master writes to the slave. When bit 0 (R/W) is set to 1, the master reads from the slave.

_Figure 67. I2C 7-bit Address Format_

**==> picture [297 x 91] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
S A6 A5 A4 A3 A2 A1 A0 R/W ACK<br>sent by slave<br>Slave Address<br>S = START Condition ACK = Acknowledge R/W = Read/Write Pulse<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.3.6.2.2. 10-bit Address Format**

During 10-bit addressing, two bytes are transferred to set the 10-bit address. The transfer of the first byte contains the following bit definition. The first five bits (bits 7:3) notify the slaves that this is a 10-bit transfer followed by the next two bits (bits 2:1), which set the slaves address bits 9:8, and the LSB bit (bit 0) is the R/W bit. The second byte transferred sets bits 7:0 of the slave address. Figure 68 shows the 10-bit address format.

_Figure 68. 10-bit Address Format_

|||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||S|‘1’|‘1’||‘1’|‘0’|A9||A8|R/W|ACK||A7||A6|A5|A4|A3|A2||A1|A0|ACK|||
||||||||||||sent||by slave|||||||||sent by slave||||
||Reserved||for|10-bit||Address||||||||||||||||||||
||S = START Condition||||||ACK||= Acknowledge||||||R/W = Read/Write||||Pulse|||||||



This table defines the special purpose and reserved first byte addresses.

|_Table 448. I2C/SMBus_<br>_Definition of Bits in_<br>_First Byte_|**Slave Address**|**R/W Bit**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0000 000|0|General Call Address. DW_apb_i2c<br>places the data in the receive buffer<br>and issues a General Call interrupt.|
||0000 000|1|START byte. For more details, refer to<br>Section 4.3.6.4.|
||0000 001|X|CBUS address. DW_apb_i2c ignores<br>these accesses.|
||0000 010|X|Reserved.|
||0000 011|X|Reserved.|
||0000 1XX|X|High-speed master code (for more<br>information, refer toSection 4.3.8).|
||1111 1XX|X|Reserved.|
||1111 0XX|X|10-bit slave addressing.|
||0001 000|X|SMbus Host (not supported)|
||0001 100|X|SMBus Alert Response Address (not<br>supported)|
||1100 001|X|SMBus Device Default Address (not<br>supported)|



DW_apb_i2c does not restrict you from using these reserved addresses. However, if you use these reserved addresses,

4.3. I2C

**446**

RP2040 Datasheet

you may run into incompatibilities with other I2C components.

## **4.3.6.3. Transmitting and Receiving Protocol**

The master can initiate data transmission and reception to/from the bus, acting as either a master-transmitter or master-receiver. A slave responds to requests from the master to either transmit data or receive data to/from the bus, acting as either a slave-transmitter or slave-receiver, respectively.

## **4.3.6.3.1. Master-Transmitter and Slave-Receiver**

All data is transmitted in byte format, with no limit on the number of bytes transferred per data transfer. After the master sends the address and R/W bit or the master transmits a byte of data to the slave, the slave-receiver must respond with the acknowledge signal (ACK). When a slave-receiver does not respond with an ACK pulse, the master aborts the transfer by issuing a STOP condition. The slave must leave the SDA line high so that the master can abort the transfer. If the master-transmitter is transmitting data as shown in Figure 69, then the slave-receiver responds to the mastertransmitter with an acknowledge pulse after every byte of data is received.

_Figure 69. I2C MasterTransmitter Protocol_

**==> picture [298 x 140] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
For 7-bit Address<br>S Slave Address R/W A DATA A DATA A/A P<br>‘0’ (read)<br>For 10-bit Address<br>S Slave AddressFirst 7 bits R/W A Slave AddressSecond Byte A DATA A/A P<br>‘11110xxx’ ‘0’ (write)<br>From Master to Slave A = Acknowledge (SDA low) S = START Condition<br>From Slave to  Master A = No Acknowledge (SDA high) P = STOP Condition<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.3.6.3.2. Master-Receiver and Slave-Transmitter**

If the master is receiving data as shown in Figure 70, then the master responds to the slave-transmitter with an acknowledge pulse after a byte of data has been received, except for the last byte. This is the way the master-receiver notifies the slave-transmitter that this is the last byte. The slave-transmitter relinquishes the SDA line after detecting the No Acknowledge (NACK) so that the master can issue a STOP condition.

_Figure 70. I2C MasterReceiver Protocol_

**==> picture [298 x 151] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
For 7-bit Address<br>S Slave Address R/W A DATA A DATA A P<br>‘1’ (read)<br>For 10-bit Address<br>S Slave AddressFirst 7 bits R/W A Slave AddressSecond Byte A Sr Slave AddressFirst 7 bits R/W A DATA A P<br>‘11110xxx’ ‘0’ (write) ‘11110xxx’ ‘1’ (read)<br>From Master to Slave A = Acknowledge (SDA low) R = RESTART Condition<br>From Slave to  Master A = No Acknowledge (SDA high) P = STOP Condition<br>S = START Condition<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


When a master does not want to relinquish the bus with a STOP condition, the master can issue a RESTART condition. This is identical to a START condition except it occurs after the ACK pulse. Operating in master mode, the DW_apb_i2c can then communicate with the same slave using a transfer of a different direction. For a description of the combined format transactions that the DW_apb_i2c supports, refer to Section 4.3.5.2.

4.3. I2C

**447**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

The DW_apb_i2c must be completely disabled before the target slave address register (IC_TAR) can be reprogrammed.

## **4.3.6.4. START BYTE Transfer Protocol**

The START BYTE transfer protocol is set up for systems that do not have an on-board dedicated I2C hardware module. When the DW_apb_i2c is addressed as a slave, it always samples the I2C bus at the highest speed supported so that it never requires a START BYTE transfer. However, when DW_apb_i2c is a master, it supports the generation of START BYTE transfers at the beginning of every transfer in case a slave device requires it.

This protocol consists of seven zeros being transmitted followed by a one, as illustrated in Figure 71. This allows the processor that is polling the bus to under-sample the address phase until zero is detected. Once the microcontroller detects a zero, it switches from the under sampling rate to the correct rate of the master.

_Figure 71. I2C Start Byte Transfer_

**==> picture [297 x 95] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
dummy<br>SDA acknowledge<br>(HIGH)<br>SCL 1 2 7 8 9<br>S Ack Sr<br>start byte 00000001<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The START BYTE procedure is as follows:

1. Master generates a START condition.

2. Master transmits the START byte (0000 0001).

3. Master transmits the ACK clock pulse. (Present only to conform with the byte handling format used on the bus)

4. No slave sets the ACK signal to zero.

5. Master generates a RESTART (R) condition.

A hardware receiver does not respond to the START BYTE because it is a reserved address and resets after the RESTART condition is generated.

## **4.3.7. Tx FIFO Management and START, STOP and RESTART Generation**

When operating as a master, the DW_apb_i2c component supports the mode of Tx FIFO management illustrated in Figure 72

## **4.3.7.1. Tx FIFO Management**

The component does not generate a STOP if the Tx FIFO becomes empty; in this situation the component holds the SCL line low, stalling the bus until a new entry is available in the Tx FIFO. A STOP condition is generated only when the user specifically requests it by setting bit nine (Stop bit) of the command written to IC_DATA_CMD register. Figure 72 shows the bits in the IC_DATA_CMD register.

4.3. I2C

**448**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Figure 72._<br>_IC_DATA_CMD_|||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Register_|IC_DATA_CMD Restart<br>Stop<br>CMD|||DATA|||
|||9<br>8|7||0||
||Data|Read/Write field; data retrieved from slave is read from|||||
|||this field; data to be sent to slave is written to this field|||||
||CMD|Write-only field; this bit determines whether transfer to<br>be carried out is Read (CMD=1) or Write (CMD=0)|||||
||Stop|Write-only field; this bit determines whether STOP is|||||
|||generated after data byte is sent or received|||||
||Restart|Write-only field; this bit determines whether RESTART<br>(or STOP followed by START in case or restart<br>capability is not enabled) is generated before data is|||||
|||sent or received|||||



Figure 73 illustrates the behaviour of the DW_apb_i2c when the Tx FIFO becomes empty while operating as a master transmitter, as well as showing the generation of a STOP condition.

|_Figure 73. Master_|||S||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||P||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Transmitter - Tx FIFO_|SDA|||A6<br>A5|A4|A3||A2|A1|A0|W Ack|D7|D6|D5||D4||D3|D2||D1|D0||Ack|D7||D6|D5|D4|D3||D2||D1|D0|Ack||D7|D6||D5<br>D4<br>D3|D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>Ack|||
|_Empties/STOP_<br>_Generation_|SCL<br>FIFO_||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||EMPTY|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||STOP bit enabled triggers<br>STOP condition on bus|||
||||Data availability triggers<br>START condition on bus||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||Last|||byte||popped from|||||||Because STOP bit|||||was||not set on||||Tx FIFO loaded||||Master releases SCL line and||||
||Tx FIFO loaded with data|||||||||||||Tx FIFO, with STOP bit<br>not set||||||||||||last byte popped from Tx FIFO,<br>Master holds SCL low|||||||||||with new data||||resumes transmission because<br>new data became available||||
||(write data in this example)||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||Last||byte popped|from Tx FIFO|||
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||with||STOP bit set||||



Figure 74 illustrates the behaviour of the DW_apb_i2c when the Tx FIFO becomes empty while operating as a master receiver, as well as showing the generation of a STOP condition.

|SDA<br>SCL<br>FIFO_<br>EMPTY<br>A6<br>S<br>Tx FIFO loaded with command<br>(read operation in this example)<br>Last command<br>popped from Tx<br>FIFO, with STOP bit<br>not set<br>Tx F<br>with<br>Because STOP bit was<br>not set on last<br>command popped<br>from Tx FIFO, Master<br>holds SCL low<br>Command availability triggers<br>START condition on bus<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br><br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>R<br>Ack<br>Ack<br>_Figure 74. Master_<br>_Receiver - Tx FIFO_<br>_Empties/STOP_<br>_Generation_||||
|---|---|---|---|
||IFO loaded<br>new command<br>STOP bit enabled triggers<br>STOP condition on bus<br>Master releases SCL line and<br>resumes transmission<br>because new command<br>became available<br> <br>D0<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>Nak<br>Ack<br>S||ak<br>S|
|||STOP bit enabled triggers<br>STOP condition on bus<br>Master releases SCL line and<br>resumes transmission<br>because new command<br>became available||
||Last command popped from<br>Tx FIFO with STOP bit set|||



Figure 75 and Figure 76 illustrate configurations where the user can control the generation of RESTART conditions on the I2C bus. If bit 10 (Restart) of the IC_DATA_CMD register is set and the restart capability is enabled (IC_RESTART_EN=1), a RESTART is generated before the data byte is written to or read from the slave. If the restart capability is not enabled a STOP followed by a START is generated in place of the RESTART. Figure 75 illustrates this situation during operation as a master transmitter.

|_Figure 75. Master_|||S|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||SR||||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Transmitter — Restart_|SDA||A6<br>A5<br>A4|A3|A2|A1||A0|W|Ack|D7|D6|D5|D4|D3|D2|D1|D0|Ack||D7||D6|D5|D4|D3|D2|D1|D0|Ack||||A6|A5|A4|A3|A2|A1|A0|W|Ack|D7|D6||
|_Bit ofIC_DATA_CMD_|SCL|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|_Is Set_||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||FIFO_|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||EMPTY|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||||Data availability triggers<br>START condition on bus|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||Because next byte on Tx FIFO||||||||has||||||
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||been tagged with RESTART bit,||||||||||||||
||Tx FIFO loaded with data<br>(write data in this example)||||||||||||||||||Next byte in Tx FIFO<br>has RESTART bit set|||||||||||||Master issues RESTART and<br>initiates new transmission||||||||||||||
||Figure||76illustrates||||the|||same situation, but during operation|||||||||||||||||||||||as||a master receiver.|||||||||||
|_Figure 76. Master_|||S|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||SR||||||||||||||
|_Receiver — Restart Bit_|SDA||A6<br>A5<br>A4|A3|A2|A1||A0|R|Ack|D7|D6|D5|D4|D3|D2|D1|D0|Ack||D7||D6|D5|D4|D3|D2|D1|D0|Nak||||A6|A5|A4|A3|A2|A1|A0|R|Ack|D7|D6||
|_ofIC_DATA_CMD Is_|SCL|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|_Set_||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||FIFO_|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||EMPTY|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||Because next command on|||||||Tx FIFO||
||||Command availability triggers<br>START condition on bus||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||has been tagged with RESTART bit,<br>Master issues RESTART and|||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||initiates new transmission|||||||||
||Tx FIFO loaded with command|||||||||||||||||||Next||command in Tx FIFO||||||||Master||issues NOT ACK as||||||||||||||
||(read operation in this example)|||||||||||||||||||has RESTART|||||bit set|||||required before RESTART||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||when operating as|||||receiver|||||||||||



Figure 77 illustrates operation as a master transmitter where the Stop bit of the IC_DATA_CMD register is set and the Tx FIFO is not empty

4.3. I2C

**449**

RP2040 Datasheet

|||S|A6<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>W Ack<br>Ack<br>Ack<br>|S<br>P|A6<br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>D6<br>D7<br>Ack<br>W|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|DA||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|O_<br>TY||||||
||One byte (not last one)<br>i d frm T FIFO<br>Because more data is available in<br>T FIFO  n trnmiin i<br>Data availability triggers<br>START condition on bus<br>Because STOP bit was set on last<br>bt d frm T FIFO Mtr|||||



Figure 78 illustrates operation as a master transmitter where the first byte loaded into the Tx FIFO is allowed to go empty with the Restart bit set

_Figure 78. Master Transmitter — First Byte Loaded Into Tx FIFO Allowed to Empty, Restart Bit Set_

||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||S|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||SR||||||||||||||||
|SDA||||A6|A5|A4|A3|A2|A1|A0|W Ack|D7|D6|D5|D4|D3|D2|D1|D0|Ack||D7|D6|D5<br>D4||D3|D2|D1|D0|Ack||||||A6|A5|A4||A3|A2|A1|A0|W|Ack|D7|D6||
|SCL|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|FIFO_<br>EMPTY||||||||||||||||||||||||Because STOP bit was|||||||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||||||||||||not set on last byte|||||||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||||||||||||popped||from Tx FIFO,|||||||||||||||||||||||
|||Data||availability triggers START||||||||||||||||||||Master|holds SCL low||||||||||||||||||||||||
|||condition|||on bus||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||Master issues RESTART and||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||initiates new transmission||||||||||
|Tx FIFO loaded with data<br>(write data in this example)||||||||||||||||||||Last byte popped<br>from Tx FIFO with|||||||||||Tx FIFO loaded<br>with new command||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||||||||STOP|||bit not set||||||||||||||||||||||||||



Figure 79 illustrates operation as a master receiver where the Stop bit of the IC_DATA_CMD register is set and the Tx FIFO is not empty

_Figure 79. Master Receiver — Stop Bit of IC_DATA_CMD Set/Tx FIFO Not Empty_

|||S|A6<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>A6<br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>D7<br>D6<br>R<br>R<br>Ack<br>Ack<br>Ack<br>S<br>P<br>Nak|A6<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>D7<br>D6<br>D5<br>D4<br>D3<br>D2<br>D1<br>D0<br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>A6<br>A5<br>A4<br>A3<br>A2<br>A1<br>A0<br>D7<br>D6<br>R<br>R<br>Ack<br>Ack<br>Ack<br>S<br>P<br>Nak|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|DA|||||
||||||
|O_<br>TY|||||
||Command availability triggers<br>START condition on bus|||Because more commands<br>are available inTx FIFO, a<br>new transmission is<br>immediately initiated<br>(rovided master is ranted<br>Because STOP bit was<br>set on last command<br>popped from Tx FIFO,<br>Master generates<br>STOP condition|



Figure 80 illustrates operation as a master receiver where the first command loaded after the Tx FIFO is allowed to empty and the Restart bit is set

_Figure 80. Master Receiver — First Command Loaded After Tx FIFO Allowed to Empty/Restart Bit Set_

**==> picture [297 x 92] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
S SR<br>SDA A6 A5 A4 A3 A2 A1 A0 R Ack D7 D6 D5 D4 D3 D2 D1 D0 Ack D7 D6 D5 D4 D3 D2 D1 D0 Nak A6 A5 A4 A3 A2 A1 A0 R Ack D7 D6<br>SCL<br>FIFO_<br>EMPTY<br>Tx FIFO loaded with command (read operation in this example)Command availability triggers START condition on bus Last command popped from Tx FIFO with STOP bit not set Because STOP bit was not set on last command popped from Tx FIFO, Master holds SCL low Next command loaded into Master issues NOT ACK as required before RESTART when operating as receiverMaster issues RESTART and initiates new transmission<br>Tx FIFO has RESTART bit set<br>Tx FIFO loaded<br>with new command<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.3.8. Multiple Master Arbitration**

The DW_apb_i2c bus protocol allows multiple masters to reside on the same bus. If there are two masters on the same I2C-bus, there is an arbitration procedure if both try to take control of the bus at the same time by generating a START condition at the same time. Once a master (for example, a microcontroller) has control of the bus, no other master can take control until the first master sends a STOP condition and places the bus in an idle state.

Arbitration takes place on the SDA line, while the SCL line is one. The master, which transmits a one while the other master transmits zero, loses arbitration and turns off its data output stage. The master that lost arbitration can continue to generate clocks until the end of the byte transfer. If both masters are addressing the same slave device, the arbitration could go into the data phase.

Upon detecting that it has lost arbitration to another master, the DW_apb_i2c will stop generating SCL (will disable the output driver). Figure 81 illustrates the timing of when two masters are arbitrating on the bus.

4.3. I2C

**450**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 81. Multiple Master Arbitration_

**==> picture [297 x 167] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
CLKA MSB ‘1’ DATA1 loses arbitration<br>matching data<br>DATA2 MSB ‘0’<br>SDA mirrors DATA2<br>SDA MSB<br>SCL<br>SDA lines up<br>with DATA1<br>START condition<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Control of the bus is determined by address or master code and data sent by competing masters, so there is no central master nor any order of priority on the bus.

Arbitration is not allowed between the following conditions:

- [A RESTART condition and a data bit]

- [A STOP condition and a data bit]

- [A RESTART condition and a STOP condition]

##  **NOTE**

Slaves are not involved in the arbitration process.

## **4.3.9. Clock Synchronization**

When two or more masters try to transfer information on the bus at the same time, they must arbitrate and synchronize the SCL clock. All masters generate their own clock to transfer messages. Data is valid only during the high period of SCL clock. Clock synchronization is performed using the wired-AND connection to the SCL signal. When the master transitions the SCL clock to zero, the master starts counting the low time of the SCL clock and transitions the SCL clock signal to one at the beginning of the next clock period. However, if another master is holding the SCL line to 0, then the master goes into a HIGH wait state until the SCL clock line transitions to one.

All masters then count off their high time, and the master with the shortest high time transitions the SCL line to zero. The masters then count out their low time and the one with the longest low time forces the other masters into a HIGH wait state. Therefore, a synchronized SCL clock is generated, which is illustrated in Figure 82. Optionally, slaves may hold the SCL line low to slow down the timing on the I2C bus.

_Figure 82. MultiMaster Clock Synchronization_

**==> picture [297 x 122] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Wait State<br>Start counting HIGH period<br>CLKA<br>CLKB<br>SCL<br>SCL LOW transition Resets all CLKs  SCL transitions HIGH when<br>to start counting their LOW periods all CLKs are in HIGH state<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


4.3. I2C

**451**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.3.10. Operation Modes**

This section provides information on operation modes.

##  **NOTE**

It is important to note that the DW_apb_i2c should only be set to operate as an I2C Master, or I2C Slave, but not both simultaneously. This is achieved by ensuring that IC_CON.IC_SLAVE_DISABLE and IC_CON.MASTER_MODE are never set to zero and one, respectively.

## **4.3.10.1. Slave Mode Operation**

This section discusses slave mode procedures.

## **4.3.10.1.1. Initial Configuration**

To use the DW_apb_i2c as a slave, perform the following steps:

1. Disable the DW_apb_i2c by writing a ‘0’ to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.

2. Write to the IC_SAR register (bits 9:0) to set the slave address. This is the address to which the DW_apb_i2c responds.

3. Write to the IC_CON register to specify which type of addressing is supported (7-bit or 10-bit by setting bit 3). Enable the DW_apb_i2c in slave-only mode by writing a ‘0’ into bit six (IC_SLAVE_DISABLE) and a ‘0’ to bit zero (MASTER_MODE).

##  **NOTE**

Slaves and masters do not have to be programmed with the same type of addressing 7-bit or 10-bit address. For instance, a slave can be programmed with 7-bit addressing and a master with 10-bit addressing, and vice versa.

1. Enable the DW_apb_i2c by writing a ‘1’ to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.

##  **NOTE**

Depending on the reset values chosen, steps two and three may not be necessary because the reset values can be configured. For instance, if the device is only going to be a master, there would be no need to set the slave address because you can configure DW_apb_i2c to have the slave disabled after reset and to enable the master after reset. The values stored are static and do not need to be reprogrammed if the DW_apb_i2c is disabled.

##  **WARNING**

It is recommended that the DW_apb_i2c Slave be brought out of reset only when the I2C bus is IDLE. De-asserting the reset when a transfer is ongoing on the bus causes internal synchronization flip-flops used to synchronize SDA and SCL to toggle from a reset value of one to the actual value on the bus. This can result in SDA toggling from one to zero while SCL is one, thereby causing a false START condition to be detected by the DW_apb_i2c Slave. This scenario can also be avoided by configuring the DW_apb_i2c with IC_SLAVE_DISABLE = 1 and MASTER_MODE = 1 so that the Slave interface is disabled after reset. It can then be enabled by programming IC_CON[0] = 0 and IC_CON[6] = 0 after the internal SDA and SCL have synchronized to the value on the bus; this takes approximately six ic_clk cycles after reset de-assertion.

4.3. I2C

**452**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.3.10.1.2. Slave-Transmitter Operation for a Single Byte**

When another I2C master device on the bus addresses the DW_apb_i2c and requests data, the DW_apb_i2c acts as a slave-transmitter and the following steps occur:

1. The other I2C master device initiates an I2C transfer with an address that matches the slave address in the IC_SAR register of the DW_apb_i2c.

2. The DW_apb_i2c acknowledges the sent address and recognizes the direction of the transfer to indicate that it is acting as a slave-transmitter.

3. The DW_apb_i2c asserts the RD_REQ interrupt (bit five of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register) and holds the SCL line low. It is in a wait state until software responds. If the RD_REQ interrupt has been masked, due to IC_INTR_MASK.M_RD_REQ being set to zero, then it is recommended that a hardware and/or software timing routine be used to instruct the CPU to perform periodic reads of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.

   - a. Reads that indicate IC_RAW_INTR_STAT.RD_REQ being set to one must be treated as the equivalent of the RD_REQ interrupt being asserted.

   - b. Software must then act to satisfy the I2C transfer.

   - c. The timing interval used should be in the order of 10 times the fastest SCL clock period the DW_apb_i2c can handle. For example, for 400kbps, the timing interval is 25μs.

##  **NOTE**

The value of 10 is recommended here because this is approximately the amount of time required for a single byte of data transferred on the I2C bus.

1. If there is any data remaining in the Tx FIFO before receiving the read request, then the DW_apb_i2c asserts a TX_ABRT interrupt (bit six of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register) to flush the old data from the TX FIFO. If the TX_ABRT interrupt has been masked, due to IC_INTR_MASK.M_TX_ABRT being set to zero, then it is recommended that re-using the timing routine (described in the previous step), or a similar one, be used to read the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.

##  **NOTE**

Because the DW_apb_i2c’s Tx FIFO is forced into a flushed/reset state whenever a TX_ABRT event occurs, it is necessary for software to release the DW_apb_i2c from this state by reading the IC_CLR_TX_ABRT register before attempting to write into the Tx FIFO. See register IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for more details.

- a. Reads that indicate bit six (R_TX_ABRT) being set to one must be treated as the equivalent of the TX_ABRT interrupt being asserted.

- b. There is no further action required from software.

- c. The timing interval used should be similar to that described in the previous step for the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT.RD_REQ register.

   1. Software writes to the IC_DATA_CMD register with the data to be written (by writing a ‘0’ in bit 8).

   2. Software must clear the RD_REQ and TX_ABRT interrupts (bits five and six, respectively) of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register before proceeding. If the RD_REQ and/or TX_ABRT interrupts have been masked, then clearing of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register will have already been performed when either the R_RD_REQ or R_TX_ABRT bit has been read as one.

   3. The DW_apb_i2c releases the SCL and transmits the byte.

   4. The master may hold the I2C bus by issuing a RESTART condition or release the bus by issuing a STOP condition.

4.3. I2C

**453**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

Slave-Transmitter Operation for a Single Byte is not applicable in Ultra-Fast Mode as Read transfers are not supported.

## **4.3.10.1.3. Slave-Receiver Operation for a Single Byte**

When another I2C master device on the bus addresses the DW_apb_i2c and is sending data, the DW_apb_i2c acts as a slave-receiver and the following steps occur:

1. The other I2C master device initiates an I2C transfer with an address that matches the DW_apb_i2c’s slave address in the IC_SAR register.

2. The DW_apb_i2c acknowledges the sent address and recognizes the direction of the transfer to indicate that the DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-receiver.

3. DW_apb_i2c receives the transmitted byte and places it in the receive buffer.

##  **NOTE**

If the Rx FIFO is completely filled with data when a byte is pushed, then the DW_apb_i2c slave holds the I2C SCL line low until the Rx FIFO has some space, and then continues with the next read request.

1. DW_apb_i2c asserts the RX_FULL interrupt IC_RAW_INTR_STAT.RX_FULL. If the RX_FULL interrupt has been masked, due to setting IC_INTR_MASK.M_RX_FULL register to zero or setting IC_TX_TL to a value larger than zero, then it is recommended that a timing routine (described in Section 4.3.10.1.2) be implemented for periodic reads of the IC_STATUS register. Reads of the IC_STATUS register, with bit 3 (RFNE) set at one, must then be treated by software as the equivalent of the RX_FULL interrupt being asserted.

2. Software may read the byte from the IC_DATA_CMD register (bits 7:0).

3. The other master device may hold the I2C bus by issuing a RESTART condition, or release the bus by issuing a STOP condition.

## **4.3.10.1.4. Slave-Transfer Operation For Bulk Transfers**

In the standard I2C protocol, all transactions are single byte transactions and the programmer responds to a remote master read request by writing one byte into the slave’s TX FIFO. When a slave (slave-transmitter) is issued with a read request (RD_REQ) from the remote master (master-receiver), at a minimum there should be at least one entry placed into the slave-transmitter’s TX FIFO. DW_apb_i2c is designed to handle more data in the TX FIFO so that subsequent read requests can take that data without raising an interrupt to get more data. Ultimately, this eliminates the possibility of significant latencies being incurred between raising the interrupt for data each time had there been a restriction of having only one entry placed in the TX FIFO. This mode only occurs when DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-transmitter. If the remote master acknowledges the data sent by the slave-transmitter and there is no data in the slave’s TX FIFO, the DW_apb_i2c holds the I2C SCL line low while it raises the read request interrupt (RD_REQ) and waits for data to be written into the TX FIFO before it can be sent to the remote master.

If the RD_REQ interrupt is masked, due to IC_INTR_STAT.R_RD_REQ set to zero, then it is recommended that a timing routine be used to activate periodic reads of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register. Reads of IC_RAW_INTR_STAT that return bit five (RD_REQ) set to one must be treated as the equivalent of the RD_REQ interrupt referred to in this section. This timing routine is similar to that described in Section 4.3.10.1.2.

The RD_REQ interrupt is raised upon a read request, and like interrupts, must be cleared when exiting the interrupt service handling routine (ISR). The ISR allows you to either write one byte or more than one byte into the Tx FIFO. During the transmission of these bytes to the master, if the master acknowledges the last byte, then the slave must raise the RD_REQ again because the master is requesting for more data. If the programmer knows in advance that the remote master is requesting a packet of 'n' bytes, then when another master addresses DW_apb_i2c and requests data, the Tx FIFO could be written with 'n' bytes and the remote master receives it as a continuous stream of data. For example, the

4.3. I2C

**454**

RP2040 Datasheet

DW_apb_i2c slave continues to send data to the remote master as long as the remote master is acknowledging the data sent and there is data available in the Tx FIFO. There is no need to hold the SCL line low or to issue RD_REQ again.

If the remote master is to receive 'n' bytes from the DW_apb_i2c but the programmer wrote a number of bytes larger than 'n' to the Tx FIFO, then when the slave finishes sending the requested 'n' bytes, it clears the Tx FIFO and ignores any excess bytes.

The DW_apb_i2c generates a transmit abort (TX_ABRT) event to indicate the clearing of the Tx FIFO in this example. At the time an ACK/NACK is expected, if a NACK is received, then the remote master has all the data it wants. At this time, a flag is raised within the slave’s state machine to clear the leftover data in the Tx FIFO. This flag is transferred to the processor bus clock domain where the FIFO exists and the contents of the Tx FIFO is cleared at that time.

## **4.3.10.2. Master Mode Operation**

This section discusses master mode procedures.

## **4.3.10.2.1. Initial Configuration**

To use the DW_apb_i2c as a master perform the following steps:

1. Disable the DW_apb_i2c by writing zero to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.

2. Write to the IC_CON register to set the maximum speed mode supported (bits 2:1) and the desired speed of the DW_apb_i2c master-initiated transfers, either 7-bit or 10-bit addressing (bit 4). Ensure that bit six (IC_SLAVE_DISABLE) is written with a ‘1’ and bit zero (MASTER_MODE) is written with a ‘1’.

Note: Slaves and masters do not have to be programmed with the same type of 7-bit or 10-bit address. For instance, a slave can be programmed with 7-bit addressing and a master with 10-bit addressing, and vice versa.

1. Write to the IC_TAR register the address of the I2C device to be addressed (bits 9:0). This register also indicates whether a General Call or a START BYTE command is going to be performed by I2C.

2. Enable the DW_apb_i2c by writing a one to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.

3. Now write transfer direction and data to be sent to the IC_DATA_CMD register. If the IC_DATA_CMD register is written before the DW_apb_i2c is enabled, the data and commands are lost as the buffers are kept cleared when DW_apb_i2c is disabled. This step generates the START condition and the address byte on the DW_apb_i2c. Once DW_apb_i2c is enabled and there is data in the TX FIFO, DW_apb_i2c starts reading the data.

##  **NOTE**

Depending on the reset values chosen, steps two, three, four, and five may not be necessary because the reset values can be configured. The values stored are static and do not need to be reprogrammed if the DW_apb_i2c is disabled, with the exception of the transfer direction and data.

## **4.3.10.2.2. Master Transmit and Master Receive**

The DW_apb_i2c supports switching back and forth between reading and writing dynamically. To transmit data, write the data to be written to the lower byte of the I2C Rx/Tx Data Buffer and Command Register (IC_DATA_CMD). The CMD bit [8] should be written to zero for I2C write operations. Subsequently, a read command may be issued by writing “don’t cares” to the lower byte of the IC_DATA_CMD register, and a one should be written to the CMD bit. The DW_apb_i2c master continues to initiate transfers as long as there are commands present in the transmit FIFO. If the transmit FIFO becomes empty the master either inserts a STOP condition after completing the current transfers.

- [If set to one, it issues a STOP condition after completing the current transfer.]

- [If set to zero, it holds ][SCL][ low until next command is written to the transmit FIFO.]

For more details, refer to Section 4.3.7.

4.3. I2C

**455**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.3.10.3. Disabling DW_apb_i2c**

The register IC_ENABLE_STATUS is added to allow software to unambiguously determine when the hardware has completely shutdown in response to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE being set from one to zero.

Only one register is required to be monitored, as opposed to monitoring two registers (IC_STATUS and IC_RAW_INTR_STAT) which was a requirement for earlier versions of DW_apb_i2c.

##  **NOTE**

The DW_apb_i2c Master can be disabled only if the current command being processed—when the ic_enable deassertion occurs—has the STOP bit set to one. When an attempt is made to disable the DW_apb_i2c Master while processing a command without the STOP bit set, the DW_apb_i2c Master continues to remain active, holding the SCL line low until a new command is received in the Tx FIFO. When the DW_apb_i2c Master is processing a command without the STOP bit set, you can issue the ABORT (IC_ENABLE.ABORT) to relinquish the I2C bus and then disable DW_apb_i2c.

## **4.3.10.3.1. Procedure**

1. Define a timer interval (ti2c_poll) equal to the 10 times the signalling period for the highest I2C transfer speed used in the system and supported by DW_apb_i2c. For example, if the highest I2C transfer mode is 400kbps, then this ti2c_poll is 25μs.

2. Define a maximum time-out parameter, MAX_T_POLL_COUNT, such that if any repeated polling operation exceeds this maximum value, an error is reported.

3. Execute a blocking thread/process/function that prevents any further I2C master transactions to be started by software, but allows any pending transfers to be completed.

##  **NOTE**

This step can be ignored if DW_apb_i2c is programmed to operate as an I2C slave only.

1. The variable POLL_COUNT is initialized to zero.

2. Set bit zero of the IC_ENABLE register to zero.

3. Read the IC_ENABLE_STATUS register and test the IC_EN bit (bit 0). Increment POLL_COUNT by one. If POLL_COUNT >= MAX_T_POLL_COUNT, exit with the relevant error code.

4. If IC_ENABLE_STATUS[0] is one, then sleep for ti2c_poll and proceed to the previous step. Otherwise, exit with a relevant success code.

## **4.3.10.4. Aborting I2C Transfers**

The ABORT control bit of the IC_ENABLE register allows the software to relinquish the I2C bus before completing the issued transfer commands from the Tx FIFO. In response to an ABORT request, the controller issues the STOP condition over the I2C bus, followed by Tx FIFO flush. Aborting the transfer is allowed only in master mode of operation.

## **4.3.10.4.1. Procedure**

1. Stop filling the Tx FIFO (IC_DATA_CMD) with new commands.

2. When operating in DMA mode, disable the transmit DMA by setting TDMAE to zero.

3. Set IC_ENABLE.ABORT to one.

4. Wait for the M_TX_ABRT interrupt.

4.3. I2C

**456**

RP2040 Datasheet

5. Read the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register to identify the source as ABRT_USER_ABRT.

## **4.3.11. Spike Suppression**

The DW_apb_i2c contains programmable spike suppression logic that match requirements imposed by the I2C Bus Specification for SS/FS modes. This logic is based on counters that monitor the input signals (SCL and SDA), checking if they remain stable for a predetermined amount of ic_clk cycles before they are sampled internally. There is one separate counter for each signal (SCL and SDA). The number of ic_clk cycles can be programmed by the user and should be calculated taking into account the frequency of ic_clk and the relevant spike length specification. Each counter is started whenever its input signal changes its value. Depending on the behaviour of the input signal, one of the following scenarios occurs:

- [The input signal remains unchanged until the counter reaches its count limit value. When this happens, the internal] version of the signal is updated with the input value, and the counter is reset and stopped. The counter is not restarted until a new change on the input signal is detected.

- [The input signal changes again before the counter reaches its count limit value. When this happens, the counter is] reset and stopped, but the internal version of the signal is not updated. The counter remains stopped until a new change on the input signal is detected.

The timing diagram in Figure 83 illustrates the behaviour described above.

_Figure 83. Spike Suppression Example_

**==> picture [297 x 68] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Recovery Clocks<br>SCL<br>Spike length counter 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 4 5 0<br>Internal filtered SCL<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


##  **NOTE**

There is a 2-stage synchronizer on the SCL input, but for the sake of simplicity this synchronization delay was not included in the timing diagram in Figure 83.

The I2C Bus Specification calls for different maximum spike lengths according to the operating mode — 50ns for SS and FS, so this register is required to store the values needed:

- [Register ][IC_FS_SPKLEN][ holds the maximum spike length for SS and FS modes]

This register is 8 bits wide and accessible through the APB interface for read and write purposes; however, they can be written to only when the DW_apb_i2c is disabled. The minimum value that can be programmed into these registers is one; attempting to program a value smaller than one results in the value one being written.

The default value for these registers is based on the value of 100ns for ic_clk period, so should be updated for the clk_sys period in use on RP2040.

4.3. I2C

**457**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

- [Because the minimum value that can be programmed into the ][IC_FS_SPKLEN][ register is one, the spike length] specification can be exceeded for low frequencies of ic_clk. Consider the simple example of a 10MHz (100ns period) ic_clk; in this case, the minimum spike length that can be programmed is 100ns, which means that spikes up to this length are suppressed.

- [Standard synchronization logic (two flip-flops in series) is implemented upstream of the spike suppression] logic and is not affected in any way by the contents of the spike length registers or the operation of the spike suppression logic; the two operations (synchronization and spike suppression) are completely independent. Because the SCL and SDA inputs are asynchronous to ic_clk, there is one ic_clk cycle uncertainty in the sampling of these signals; that is, depending on when they occur relative to the rising edge of ic_clk, spikes of the same original length might show a difference of one ic_clk cycle after being sampled.

- [Spike suppression is symmetrical; that is, the behaviour is exactly the same for transitions from zero to one and] from one to zero.

## **4.3.12. Fast Mode Plus Operation**

In fast mode plus, the DW_apb_i2c allows the fast mode operation to be extended to support speeds up to 1000kbps. To enable the DW_apb_i2c for fast mode plus operation, perform the following steps before initiating any data transfer:

1. Set ic_clk frequency greater than or equal to 32MHz (refer to Section 4.3.14.2.1).

2. Program the IC_CON register [2:1] = 2’b10 for fast mode or fast mode plus.

3. Program IC_FS_SCL_LCNT and IC_FS_SCL_HCNT registers to meet the fast mode plus SCL (refer to Section 4.3.14).

4. Program the IC_FS_SPKLEN register to suppress the maximum spike of 50ns.

5. Program the IC_SDA_SETUP register to meet the minimum data setup time (tSU; DAT).

## **4.3.13. Bus Clear Feature**

DW_apb_i2c supports the bus clear feature that provides graceful recovery of data SDA and clock SCL lines during unlikely events in which either the clock or data line is stuck at LOW.

## **4.3.13.1.** SDA **Line Stuck at LOW Recovery**

In case of SDA line stuck at LOW, the master performs the following actions to recover as shown in Figure 84 and Figure 85:

1. Master sends a maximum of nine clock pulses to recover the bus LOW within those nine clocks.

   - [The number of clock pulses will vary with the number of bits that remain to be sent by the slave. As the] maximum number of bits is nine, master sends up to nine clock pluses and allows the slave to recover it.

   - [The master attempts to assert a Logic 1 on the ][SDA][ line and check whether ][SDA][ is recovered. If the ][SDA][ is not] recovered, it will continue to send a maximum of nine SCL clocks.

2. If SDA line is recovered within nine clock pulses then the master will send the STOP to release the bus.

3. If SDA line is not recovered even after the ninth clock pulse then system needs a hardware reset.

4.3. I2C

**458**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 147] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 84.  SDA<br>Recovery with 9  SCL Recovery Clocks 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10<br>Clocks SCL<br>SDA<br>MST_SDA Master drives 9 clocks to recover SDA stuck at low<br>Figure 85.  SDA<br>Recovery with 6  SCL Recovery Clocks 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7<br>Clocks<br>SCL<br>SDA<br>MST_SDA Master drives 6 clocks to recover SDA stuck at low<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.3.13.2.** SCL **Line is Stuck at LOW**

In the unlikely event (due to an electric failure of a circuit) where the clock (SCL) is stuck to LOW, there is no effective method to overcome this problem but to reset the bus using the hardware reset signal.

## **4.3.14.** IC_CLK **Frequency Configuration**

When the DW_apb_i2c is configured as a Standard (SS), Fast (FS)/Fast-Mode Plus (FM+), the *CNT registers must be set before any I2C bus transaction can take place in order to ensure proper I/O timing. The *CNT registers are:

- [IC_SS_SCL_HCNT]

- [IC_SS_SCL_LCNT]

- [IC_FS_SCL_HCNT]

- [IC_FS_SCL_LCNT]

##  **NOTE**

The tBUF timing and setup/hold time of START, STOP and RESTART registers uses *HCNT/*LCNT register settings for the corresponding speed mode.

##  **NOTE**

It is not necessary to program any of the *CNT registers if the DW_apb_i2c is enabled to operate only as an I2C slave, since these registers are used only to determine the SCL timing requirements for operation as an I2C master.

Table 449 lists the derivation of I2C timing parameters from the *CNT programming registers.

|_Table 449. Derivation_<br>_of I2C Timing_<br>_Parameters from_<br>_*CNT Registers_|**Timing Parameter**|**Symbol**|**Standard Speed**|**Fast Speed / Fast Speed Plus**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||LOW period of theSCLclock|tLOW|IC_SS_SCL_LCNT|IC_FS_SCL_LCNT|
||HIGH period of theSCLclock|tHIGH|IC_SS_SCL_HCNT|IC_FS_SCL_HCNT|
||Setup time for a repeated<br>START condition|tSU;STA|IC_SS_SCL_LCNT|IC_FS_SCL_HCNT|
||Hold time (repeated) START<br>condition*|tHD;STA|IC_SS_SCL_HCNT|IC_FS_SCL_HCNT|
||Setup time for STOP<br>condition|tSU;STO|IC_SS_SCL_HCNT|IC_FS_SCL_HCNT|



4.3. I2C

**459**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Timing Parameter**|**Symbol**|**Standard Speed**|**Fast Speed / Fast Speed Plus**|
|---|---|---|---|
|Bus free time between a<br>STOP and a START<br>condition|tBUF|IC_SS_SCL_LCNT|IC_FS_SCL_LCNT|
|Spike length|tSP|IC_FS_SPKLEN|IC_FS_SPKLEN|
|Data hold time|tHD;DAT|IC_SDA_HOLD|IC_SDA_HOLD|
|Data setup time|tSU;DAT|IC_SDA_SETUP|IC_SDA_SETUP|



## **4.3.14.1. Minimum High and Low Counts in SS, FS, and FM+ Modes.**

When the DW_apb_i2c operates as an I2C master, in both transmit and receive transfers:

- [IC_SS_SCL_LCNT][ and ][IC_FS_SCL_LCNT][ register values must be larger than ][IC_FS_SPKLEN][ + 7.]

- [IC_SS_SCL_HCNT][ and ][IC_FS_SCL_HCNT][ register values must be larger than ][IC_FS_SPKLEN][ + 5.]

Details regarding the DW_apb_i2c high and low counts are as follows:

- [The minimum value of IC_*_SPKLEN + 7 for the *_LCNT registers is due to the time required for the DW_apb_i2c to] drive SDA after a negative edge of SCL.

- [The minimum value of IC_*_SPKLEN + 5 for the *_HCNT registers is due to the time required for the DW_apb_i2c to] sample SDA during the high period of SCL.

- [The DW_apb_i2c adds one cycle to the programmed *_LCNT value in order to generate the low period of the ][SCL] clock; this is due to the counting logic for SCL low counting to (*_LCNT + 1).

- [The DW_apb_i2c adds IC_*_SPKLEN + 7 cycles to the programmed *_HCNT value in order to generate the high] period of the SCL clock; this is due to the following factors:

   - [The counting logic for ][SCL][ high counts to (*_HCNT+1).]

   - [The digital filtering applied to the ][SCL][ line incurs a delay of SPKLEN + 2 ][ic_clk][ cycles, where SPKLEN is:]

      - [IC_FS_SPKLEN][ if the component is operating in SS or FS]

   - [Whenever ][SCL][ is driven one to zero by the DW_apb_i2c—that is, completing the ][SCL][ high time—an internal logic] latency of three ic_clk cycles is incurred. Consequently, the minimum SCL low time of which the DW_apb_i2c is capable is nine ic_clk periods (7 + 1 + 1), while the minimum SCL high time is thirteen ic_clk periods (6 + 1 + 3 + 3).

##  **NOTE**

The total high time and low time of SCL generated by the DW_apb_i2c master is also influenced by the rise time and fall time of the SCL line, as shown in the illustration and equations in Figure 86. It should be noted that the SCL rise and fall time parameters vary, depending on external factors such as:

- [Characteristics of IO driver]

- [Pull-up resistor value]

- [Total capacitance on ][SCL][ line, and so on]

These characteristics are beyond the control of the DW_apb_i2c.

4.3. I2C

**460**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 86. Impact of_ SCL _Rise Time and Fall Time on Generated_ SCL

**==> picture [297 x 146] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
ic_clk<br>ic_clk_in_a/SCL<br>HCNT + IC_*_SPKLEN + 7 LCNT + 1<br>SCL  SCL  SCL<br>rise time fall time rise time<br>SCL_High_time = [(HCNT + IC_*_SPKLEN + 7) * ic_clk] + SCL_Fall_time<br>SCL_low_time = [(LCNT + 1) * ic_clk] - SCL_Fall_time + SCL_Rise_time<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.3.14.2. Minimum** IC_CLK **Frequency**

This section describes the minimum ic_clk frequencies that the DW_apb_i2c supports for each speed mode, and the associated high and low count values. In Slave mode, IC_SDA_HOLD (Thd;dat) and IC_SDA_SETUP (Tsu:dat) need to be programmed to satisfy the I2C protocol timing requirements. The following examples are for the case where IC_FS_SPKLEN is programmed to two.

## **4.3.14.2.1. Standard Mode (SM), Fast Mode (FM), and Fast Mode Plus (FM+)**

This section details how to derive a minimum ic_clk value for standard and fast modes of the DW_apb_i2c. Although the following method shows how to do fast mode calculations, you can also use the same method in order to do calculations for standard mode and fast mode plus.

##  **NOTE**

The following computations do not consider the SCL_Rise_time and SCL_Fall_time.

Given conditions and calculations for the minimum DW_apb_i2c ic_clk value in fast mode:

- [Fast mode has data rate of 400kbps; implies ][SCL][ period of 1/400kHz = 2.5μs]

- [Minimum hcnt value of 14 as a seed value; IC_HCNT_FS = 14]

- [Protocol minimum ][SCL][ high and low times:]

   - [MIN_SCL_LOWtime_FS = 1300ns]

   - [MIN_SCL_HIGHtime_FS = 600ns]

Derived equations:

SCL_PERIOD_FS / (IC_HCNT_FS + IC_LCNT_FS) = IC_CLK_PERIOD IC_LCNT_FS × IC_CLK_PERIOD = MIN_SCL_LOWtime_FS

Combined, the previous equations produce the following:

IC_LCNT_FS × (SCL_PERIOD_FS / (IC_LCNT_FS + IC_HCNT_FS) ) = MIN_SCL_LOWtime_FS

Solving for IC_LCNT_FS:

4.3. I2C

**461**

RP2040 Datasheet

IC_LCNT_FS × (2.5μs / (IC_LCNT_FS + 14) ) = 1.3μs

The previous equation gives:

IC_LCNT_FS = roundup(15.166) = 16

These calculations produce IC_LCNT_FS = 16 and IC_HCNT_FS = 14, giving an ic_clk value of:

2.5μs / (16 + 14) = 83.3ns = 12MHz

Testing these results shows that protocol requirements are satisfied.

Table 450 lists the minimum ic_clk values for all modes with high and low count values.

_Table 450._ ic_clk _in Relation to High and Low Counts_

|**Speed Mode**|**ic_clkfreq**<br>**(MHz)**|**Minimum**<br>**Value of**<br>**IC_*_SPKLEN**|SCL**Low Time**<br>**in `ic_clk`s**|SCL**Low**<br>**Program**<br>**Value**|SCL**Low Time**|SCL**High**<br>**Time in**<br>**`ic_clk`s**|SCL**High**<br>**Program**<br>**Value**|SCL**High**<br>**Time**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|SS|2.7|1|13|12|4.7µs|14|6|5.2µs|
|FS|12.0|1|16|15|1.33µs|14|6|1.16µs|
|FM+|32|2|16|15|500ns|16|7|500ns|



- [The IC_*_SCL_LCNT and IC_*_SCL_HCNT registers are programmed using the ][SCL][ low and high program values in] Table 450, which are calculated using SCL low count minus one, and SCL high counts minus eight, respectively. The values in Table 450 are based on IC_SDA_RX_HOLD = 0. The maximum IC_SDA_RX_HOLD value depends on the IC_*CNT registers in Master mode.

- [In order to compute the HCNT and LCNT considering RC timings, use the following equations:]

   - [IC_HCNT_* = [(HCNT + IC_*_SPKLEN + 7) * ][ic_clk][] + SCL_Fall_time]

   - [IC_LCNT_* = [(LCNT + 1) * ][ic_clk][] - SCL_Fall_time + SCL_Rise_time]

## **4.3.14.3. Calculating High and Low Counts**

The calculations below show how to calculate SCL high and low counts for each speed mode in the DW_apb_i2c. For the calculations to work, the ic_clk frequencies used must not be less than the minimum ic_clk frequencies specified in Table 450.

The default ic_clk period value is set to 100ns, so default SCL high and low count values are calculated for each speed mode based on this clock. These values need updating according to the guidelines below.

The equation to calculate the proper number of ic_clk signals required for setting the proper SCL clocks high and low times is as follows:

IC_xCNT = (ROUNDUP(MIN_SCL_xxxtime*OSCFREQ,0)) MIN_SCL_HIGHtime = Minimum High Period MIN_SCL_HIGHtime =  4000ns for 100kbps, 600ns for 400kbps, 260ns for 1000kbps, MIN_SCL_LOWtime = Minimum Low Period MIN_SCL_LOWtime =   4700ns for 100kbps,

4.3. I2C

**462**

RP2040 Datasheet

1300ns for 400kbps, 500ns for 1000kbps, OSCFREQ = ic_clk Clock Frequency (Hz).

For example:

OSCFREQ = 100MHz I2Cmode = fast, 400kbps MIN_SCL_HIGHtime = 600ns. MIN_SCL_LOWtime = 1300ns. IC_xCNT = (ROUNDUP(MIN_SCL_HIGH_LOWtime*OSCFREQ,0)) IC_HCNT = (ROUNDUP(600ns * 100MHz,0)) IC_HCNTSCL PERIOD = 60 IC_LCNT = (ROUNDUP(1300ns * 100MHz,0)) IC_LCNTSCL PERIOD = 130 Actual MIN_SCL_HIGHtime = 60*(1/100MHz) = 600ns Actual MIN_SCL_LOWtime = 130*(1/100MHz) = 1300ns

## **4.3.15. DMA Controller Interface**

The DW_apb_i2c has built-in DMA capability; it has a handshaking interface to the DMA Controller to request and control transfers. The APB bus is used to perform the data transfer to or from the DMA. DMA transfers are transferred as single accesses as data rate is relatively low.

## **4.3.15.1. Enabling the DMA Controller Interface**

To enable the DMA Controller interface on the DW_apb_i2c, you must write the DMA Control Register (IC_DMA_CR). Writing a one into the TDMAE bit field of IC_DMA_CR register enables the DW_apb_i2c transmit handshaking interface. Writing a one into the RDMAE bit field of the IC_DMA_CR register enables the DW_apb_i2c receive handshaking interface.

## **4.3.15.2. Overview of Operation**

The DMA Controller is programmed with the number of data items (transfer count) that are to be transmitted or received by DW_apb_i2c.

The transfer is broken into single transfers on the bus, each initiated by a request from the DW_apb_i2c.

For example, where the transfer count programmed into the DMA Controller is four. The DMA transfer consists of a series of four single transactions. If the DW_apb_i2c makes a transmit request to this channel, a single data item is written to the DW_apb_i2c TX FIFO. Similarly, if the DW_apb_i2c makes a receive request to this channel, a single data item is read from the DW_apb_i2c RX FIFO. Four separate requests must be made to this DMA channel before all four data items are written or read.

## **4.3.15.3. Watermark Levels**

In DW_apb_i2c the registers for setting watermarks to allow DMA bursts do not need be set to anything other than their reset value. Specifically IC_DMA_TDLR and IC_DMA_RDLR can be left at reset values of zero. This is because only single transfers are needed due to the low bandwidth of I2C relative to system bandwidth, and also the DMA controller

4.3. I2C

**463**

RP2040 Datasheet

normally has highest priority on the system bus so will generally complete very quickly.

## **4.3.16. Operation of Interrupt Registers**

Table 451 lists the operation of the DW_apb_i2c interrupt registers and how they are set and cleared. Some bits are set by hardware and cleared by software, whereas other bits are set and cleared by hardware.

_Table 451. Clearing and Setting of Interrupt Registers_

|**Interrupt Bit Fields**|**Set by Hardware/Cleared by Software**|**Set and Cleared by Hardware**|
|---|---|---|
|RESTART_DET|Y|N|
|GEN_CALL|Y|N|
|START_DET|Y|N|
|STOP_DET|Y|N|
|ACTIVITY|Y|N|
|RX_DONE|Y|N|
|TX_ABRT|Y|N|
|RD_REQ|Y|N|
|TX_EMPTY|N|Y|
|TX_OVER|Y|N|
|RX_FULL|N|Y|
|RX_OVER|Y|N|
|RX_UNDER|Y|N|



## **4.3.17. List of Registers**

The I2C0 and I2C1 registers start at base addresses of 0x40044000 and 0x40048000 respectively (defined as I2C0_BASE and I2C1_BASE in SDK).

##  **NOTE**

You may see references to configuration constants in the I2C register descriptions; these are **fixed** values, set at hardware design time. A full list of their values can be found in https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/blob/ master/src/rp2040/hardware_regs/include/hardware/regs/i2c.h

_Table 452. List of I2C registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|IC_CON|I2C Control Register|
|0x04|IC_TAR|I2C Target Address Register|
|0x08|IC_SAR|I2C Slave Address Register|
|0x10|IC_DATA_CMD|I2C Rx/Tx Data Buffer and Command Register|
|0x14|IC_SS_SCL_HCNT|Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL High Count Register|
|0x18|IC_SS_SCL_LCNT|Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register|
|0x1c|IC_FS_SCL_HCNT|Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL High Count Register|
|0x20|IC_FS_SCL_LCNT|Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register|



4.3. I2C

**464**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x2c|IC_INTR_STAT|I2C Interrupt Status Register|
|0x30|IC_INTR_MASK|I2C Interrupt Mask Register|
|0x34|IC_RAW_INTR_STAT|I2C Raw Interrupt Status Register|
|0x38|IC_RX_TL|I2C Receive FIFO Threshold Register|
|0x3c|IC_TX_TL|I2C Transmit FIFO Threshold Register|
|0x40|IC_CLR_INTR|Clear Combined and Individual Interrupt Register|
|0x44|IC_CLR_RX_UNDER|Clear RX_UNDER Interrupt Register|
|0x48|IC_CLR_RX_OVER|Clear RX_OVER Interrupt Register|
|0x4c|IC_CLR_TX_OVER|Clear TX_OVER Interrupt Register|
|0x50|IC_CLR_RD_REQ|Clear RD_REQ Interrupt Register|
|0x54|IC_CLR_TX_ABRT|Clear TX_ABRT Interrupt Register|
|0x58|IC_CLR_RX_DONE|Clear RX_DONE Interrupt Register|
|0x5c|IC_CLR_ACTIVITY|Clear ACTIVITY Interrupt Register|
|0x60|IC_CLR_STOP_DET|Clear STOP_DET Interrupt Register|
|0x64|IC_CLR_START_DET|Clear START_DET Interrupt Register|
|0x68|IC_CLR_GEN_CALL|Clear GEN_CALL Interrupt Register|
|0x6c|IC_ENABLE|I2C ENABLE Register|
|0x70|IC_STATUS|I2C STATUS Register|
|0x74|IC_TXFLR|I2C Transmit FIFO Level Register|
|0x78|IC_RXFLR|I2C Receive FIFO Level Register|
|0x7c|IC_SDA_HOLD|I2C SDA Hold Time Length Register|
|0x80|IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE|I2C Transmit Abort Source Register|
|0x84|IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ONLY|Generate Slave Data NACK Register|
|0x88|IC_DMA_CR|DMA Control Register|
|0x8c|IC_DMA_TDLR|DMA Transmit Data Level Register|
|0x90|IC_DMA_RDLR|DMA Transmit Data Level Register|
|0x94|IC_SDA_SETUP|I2C SDA Setup Register|
|0x98|IC_ACK_GENERAL_CALL|I2C ACK General Call Register|
|0x9c|IC_ENABLE_STATUS|I2C Enable Status Register|
|0xa0|IC_FS_SPKLEN|I2C SS, FS or FM+ spike suppression limit|
|0xa8|IC_CLR_RESTART_DET|Clear RESTART_DET Interrupt Register|
|0xf4|IC_COMP_PARAM_1|Component Parameter Register 1|
|0xf8|IC_COMP_VERSION|I2C Component Version Register|
|0xfc|IC_COMP_TYPE|I2C Component Type Register|



## **I2C: IC_CON Register**

4.3. I2C

**465**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Offset** : 0x00

## **Description**

I2C Control Register. This register can be written only when the DW_apb_i2c is disabled, which corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times have no effect.

Read/Write Access: - bit 10 is read only. - bit 11 is read only - bit 16 is read only - bit 17 is read only - bits 18 and 19 are read only.

_Table 453. IC_CON Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:11|Reserved.|-|-|
|10|**STOP_DET_IF_MASTER_ACTIVE**: Master issues the STOP_DET interrupt<br>irrespective of whether master is active or not|RO|0x0|
|9|**RX_FIFO_FULL_HLD_CTRL**: This bit controls whether DW_apb_i2c should hold<br>the bus when the Rx FIFO is physically full to its RX_BUFFER_DEPTH, as<br>described in the IC_RX_FULL_HLD_BUS_EN parameter.<br>Reset value: 0x0.|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Overflow when RX_FIFO is full|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Hold bus when RX_FIFO is full|||
|8|**TX_EMPTY_CTRL**: This bit controls the generation of the TX_EMPTY interrupt,<br>as described in the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0.|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Default behaviour of TX_EMPTY interrupt|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Controlled generation of TX_EMPTY interrupt|||
|7|**STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED**: In slave mode: - 1’b1: issues the STOP_DET<br>interrupt only when it is addressed. - 1’b0: issues the STOP_DET irrespective of<br>whether it’s addressed or not. Reset value: 0x0<br>NOTE: During a general call address, this slave does not issue the STOP_DET<br>interrupt if STOP_DET_IF_ADDRESSED = 1’b1, even if the slave responds to the<br>general call address by generating ACK. The STOP_DET interrupt is generated<br>only when the transmitted address matches the slave address (SAR).|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: slave issues STOP_DET intr always|||
||0x1→ENABLED: slave issues STOP_DET intr only if addressed|||
|6|**IC_SLAVE_DISABLE**: This bit controls whether I2C has its slave disabled,<br>which means once the presetn signal is applied, then this bit is set and the<br>slave is disabled.<br>If this bit is set (slave is disabled), DW_apb_i2c functions only as a master and<br>does not perform any action that requires a slave.<br>NOTE: Software should ensure that if this bit is written with 0, then bit 0 should<br>also be written with a 0.|RW|0x1|



4.3. I2C

**466**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→SLAVE_ENABLED: Slave mode is enabled|||
||0x1→SLAVE_DISABLED: Slave mode is disabled|||
|5|**IC_RESTART_EN**: Determines whether RESTART conditions may be sent when<br>acting as a master. Some older slaves do not support handling RESTART<br>conditions; however, RESTART conditions are used in several DW_apb_i2c<br>operations. When RESTART is disabled, the master is prohibited from<br>performing the following functions: - Sending a START BYTE - Performing any<br>high-speed mode operation - High-speed mode operation - Performing<br>direction changes in combined format mode - Performing a read operation<br>with a 10-bit address By replacing RESTART condition followed by a STOP and<br>a subsequent START condition, split operations are broken down into multiple<br>DW_apb_i2c transfers. If the above operations are performed, it will result in<br>setting bit 6 (TX_ABRT) of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: ENABLED|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Master restart disabled|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Master restart enabled|||
|4|**IC_10BITADDR_MASTER**: Controls whether the DW_apb_i2c starts its<br>transfers in 7- or 10-bit addressing mode when acting as a master. - 0: 7-bit<br>addressing - 1: 10-bit addressing|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ADDR_7BITS: Master 7Bit addressing mode|||
||0x1→ADDR_10BITS: Master 10Bit addressing mode|||
|3|**IC_10BITADDR_SLAVE**: When acting as a slave, this bit controls whether the<br>DW_apb_i2c responds to 7- or 10-bit addresses. - 0: 7-bit addressing. The<br>DW_apb_i2c ignores transactions that involve 10-bit addressing; for 7-bit<br>addressing, only the lower 7 bits of the IC_SAR register are compared. - 1: 10-<br>bit addressing. The DW_apb_i2c responds to only 10-bit addressing transfers<br>that match the full 10 bits of the IC_SAR register.|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ADDR_7BITS: Slave 7Bit addressing|||
||0x1→ADDR_10BITS: Slave 10Bit addressing|||



4.3. I2C

**467**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|2:1|**SPEED**: These bits control at which speed the DW_apb_i2c operates; its<br>setting is relevant only if one is operating the DW_apb_i2c in master mode.<br>Hardware protects against illegal values being programmed by software.<br>These bits must be programmed appropriately for slave mode also, as it is<br>used to capture correct value of spike filter as per the speed mode.<br>This register should be programmed only with a value in the range of 1 to<br>IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE; otherwise, hardware updates this register with the<br>value of IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE.<br>1: standard mode (100 kbit/s)<br>2: fast mode (<=400 kbit/s) or fast mode plus (<=1000Kbit/s)<br>3: high speed mode (3.4 Mbit/s)<br>Note: This field is not applicable when IC_ULTRA_FAST_MODE=1|RW|0x2|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x1→STANDARD: Standard Speed mode of operation|||
||0x2→FAST: Fast or Fast Plus mode of operation|||
||0x3→HIGH: High Speed mode of operation|||
|0|**MASTER_MODE**: This bit controls whether the DW_apb_i2c master is enabled.<br>NOTE: Software should ensure that if this bit is written with '1' then bit 6<br>should also be written with a '1'.|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Master mode is disabled|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Master mode is enabled|||



## **I2C: IC_TAR Register**

**Offset** : 0x04

## **Description**

I2C Target Address Register

This register is 12 bits wide, and bits 31:12 are reserved. This register can be written to only when IC_ENABLE[0] is set to 0.

Note: If the software or application is aware that the DW_apb_i2c is not using the TAR address for the pending commands in the Tx FIFO, then it is possible to update the TAR address even while the Tx FIFO has entries (IC_STATUS[2]= 0). - It is not necessary to perform any write to this register if DW_apb_i2c is enabled as an I2C slave only.

_Table 454. IC_TAR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11|**SPECIAL**: This bit indicates whether software performs a Device-ID or General<br>Call or START BYTE command. - 0: ignore bit 10 GC_OR_START and use<br>IC_TAR normally - 1: perform special I2C command as specified in Device_ID<br>or GC_OR_START bit Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|



4.3. I2C

**468**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Disables programming of GENERAL_CALL or START_BYTE<br>transmission|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Enables programming of GENERAL_CALL or START_BYTE<br>transmission|||
|10|**GC_OR_START**: If bit 11 (SPECIAL) is set to 1 and bit 13(Device-ID) is set to 0,<br>then this bit indicates whether a General Call or START byte command is to be<br>performed by the DW_apb_i2c. - 0: General Call Address - after issuing a<br>General Call, only writes may be performed. Attempting to issue a read<br>command results in setting bit 6 (TX_ABRT) of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT<br>register. The DW_apb_i2c remains in General Call mode until the SPECIAL bit<br>value (bit 11) is cleared. - 1: START BYTE Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→GENERAL_CALL: GENERAL_CALL byte transmission|||
||0x1→START_BYTE: START byte transmission|||
|9:0|**IC_TAR**: This is the target address for any master transaction. When<br>transmitting a General Call, these bits are ignored. To generate a START BYTE,<br>the CPU needs to write only once into these bits.<br>If the IC_TAR and IC_SAR are the same, loopback exists but the FIFOs are<br>shared between master and slave, so full loopback is not feasible. Only one<br>direction loopback mode is supported (simplex), not duplex. A master cannot<br>transmit to itself; it can transmit to only a slave.|RW|0x055|



## **I2C: IC_SAR Register**

**Offset** : 0x08

## **Description**

I2C Slave Address Register

_Table 455. IC_SAR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:10|Reserved.|-|-|
|9:0|**IC_SAR**: The IC_SAR holds the slave address when the I2C is operating as a<br>slave. For 7-bit addressing, only IC_SAR[6:0] is used.<br>This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled, which<br>corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times<br>have no effect.<br>Note: The default values cannot be any of the reserved address locations: that<br>is, 0x00 to 0x07, or 0x78 to 0x7f. The correct operation of the device is not<br>guaranteed if you program the IC_SAR or IC_TAR to a reserved value. Refer to<br>Table 448for a complete list of these reserved values.|RW|0x055|



## **I2C: IC_DATA_CMD Register**

**Offset** : 0x10

4.3. I2C

**469**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

I2C Rx/Tx Data Buffer and Command Register; this is the register the CPU writes to when filling the TX FIFO and the CPU reads from when retrieving bytes from RX FIFO.

The size of the register changes as follows:

Write: - 11 bits when IC_EMPTYFIFO_HOLD_MASTER_EN=1 - 9 bits when IC_EMPTYFIFO_HOLD_MASTER_EN=0 Read: - 12 bits when IC_FIRST_DATA_BYTE_STATUS = 1 - 8 bits when IC_FIRST_DATA_BYTE_STATUS = 0 Note: In order for the DW_apb_i2c to continue acknowledging reads, a read command should be written for every byte that is to be received; otherwise the DW_apb_i2c will stop acknowledging.

_Table 456. IC_DATA_CMD Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
|11|**FIRST_DATA_BYTE**: Indicates the first data byte received after the address<br>phase for receive transfer in Master receiver or Slave receiver mode.<br>Reset value : 0x0<br>NOTE: In case of APB_DATA_WIDTH=8,<br>1. The user has to perform two APB Reads to IC_DATA_CMD in order to get<br>status on 11 bit.<br>2. In order to read the 11 bit, the user has to perform the first data byte read<br>[7:0] (offset 0x10) and then perform the second read [15:8] (offset 0x11) in<br>order to know the status of 11 bit (whether the data received in previous read<br>is a first data byte or not).<br>3. The 11th bit is an optional read field, user can ignore 2nd byte read [15:8]<br>(offset 0x11) if not interested in FIRST_DATA_BYTE status.|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: Sequential data byte received|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: Non sequential data byte received|||
|10|**RESTART**: This bit controls whether a RESTART is issued before the byte is<br>sent or received.<br>1 - If IC_RESTART_EN is 1, a RESTART is issued before the data is<br>sent/received (according to the value of CMD), regardless of whether or not<br>the transfer direction is changing from the previous command; if<br>IC_RESTART_EN is 0, a STOP followed by a START is issued instead.<br>0 - If IC_RESTART_EN is 1, a RESTART is issued only if the transfer direction is<br>changing from the previous command; if IC_RESTART_EN is 0, a STOP<br>followed by a START is issued instead.<br>Reset value: 0x0|SC|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLE: Don’t Issue RESTART before this command|||
||0x1→ENABLE: Issue RESTART before this command|||



4.3. I2C

**470**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|9|**STOP**: This bit controls whether a STOP is issued after the byte is sent or<br>received.<br>- 1 - STOP is issued after this byte, regardless of whether or not the Tx FIFO is<br>empty. If the Tx FIFO is not empty, the master immediately tries to start a new<br>transfer by issuing a START and arbitrating for the bus. - 0 - STOP is not<br>issued after this byte, regardless of whether or not the Tx FIFO is empty. If the<br>Tx FIFO is not empty, the master continues the current transfer by<br>sending/receiving data bytes according to the value of the CMD bit. If the Tx<br>FIFO is empty, the master holds the SCL line low and stalls the bus until a new<br>command is available in the Tx FIFO. Reset value: 0x0|SC|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLE: Don’t Issue STOP after this command|||
||0x1→ENABLE: Issue STOP after this command|||
|8|**CMD**: This bit controls whether a read or a write is performed. This bit does<br>not control the direction when the DW_apb_i2con acts as a slave. It controls<br>only the direction when it acts as a master.<br>When a command is entered in the TX FIFO, this bit distinguishes the write<br>and read commands. In slave-receiver mode, this bit is a 'don’t care' because<br>writes to this register are not required. In slave-transmitter mode, a '0'<br>indicates that the data in IC_DATA_CMD is to be transmitted.<br>When programming this bit, you should remember the following: attempting to<br>perform a read operation after a General Call command has been sent results<br>in a TX_ABRT interrupt (bit 6 of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register), unless bit 11<br>(SPECIAL) in the IC_TAR register has been cleared. If a '1' is written to this bit<br>after receiving a RD_REQ interrupt, then a TX_ABRT interrupt occurs.<br>Reset value: 0x0|SC|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→WRITE: Master Write Command|||
||0x1→READ: Master Read Command|||
|7:0|**DAT**: This register contains the data to be transmitted or received on the I2C<br>bus. If you are writing to this register and want to perform a read, bits 7:0<br>(DAT) are ignored by the DW_apb_i2c. However, when you read this register,<br>these bits return the value of data received on the DW_apb_i2c interface.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x00|



## **I2C: IC_SS_SCL_HCNT Register**

**Offset** : 0x14

## **Description**

Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL High Count Register

|_Table 457._<br>_IC_SS_SCL_HCNT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|



4.3. I2C

**471**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|15:0|**IC_SS_SCL_HCNT**: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction<br>can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock<br>high-period count for standard speed. For more information, refer to 'IC_CLK<br>Frequency Configuration'.<br>This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled which<br>corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times<br>have no effect.<br>The minimum valid value is 6; hardware prevents values less than this being<br>written, and if attempted results in 6 being set. For designs with<br>APB_DATA_WIDTH = 8, the order of programming is important to ensure the<br>correct operation of the DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed<br>first. Then the upper byte is programmed.<br>NOTE: This register must not be programmed to a value higher than 65525,<br>because DW_apb_i2c uses a 16-bit counter to flag an I2C bus idle condition<br>when this counter reaches a value of IC_SS_SCL_HCNT + 10.|RW|0x0028|



## **I2C: IC_SS_SCL_LCNT Register**

**Offset** : 0x18

## **Description**

Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register

|_Table 458._<br>_IC_SS_SCL_LCNT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|**IC_SS_SCL_LCNT**: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction<br>can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock<br>low period count for standard speed. For more information, refer to 'IC_CLK<br>Frequency Configuration'<br>This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled which<br>corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times<br>have no effect.<br>The minimum valid value is 8; hardware prevents values less than this being<br>written, and if attempted, results in 8 being set. For designs with<br>APB_DATA_WIDTH = 8, the order of programming is important to ensure the<br>correct operation of DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed first,<br>and then the upper byte is programmed.|RW|0x002f|



## **I2C: IC_FS_SCL_HCNT Register**

**Offset** : 0x1c

## **Description**

Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL High Count Register

|_Table 459._<br>_IC_FS_SCL_HCNT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|



4.3. I2C

**472**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|15:0|**IC_FS_SCL_HCNT**: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction<br>can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock<br>high-period count for fast mode or fast mode plus. It is used in high-speed<br>mode to send the Master Code and START BYTE or General CALL. For more<br>information, refer to 'IC_CLK Frequency Configuration'.<br>This register goes away and becomes read-only returning 0s if<br>IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE = standard. This register can be written only when the<br>I2C interface is disabled, which corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register<br>being set to 0. Writes at other times have no effect.<br>The minimum valid value is 6; hardware prevents values less than this being<br>written, and if attempted results in 6 being set. For designs with<br>APB_DATA_WIDTH == 8 the order of programming is important to ensure the<br>correct operation of the DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed<br>first. Then the upper byte is programmed.|RW|0x0006|



## **I2C: IC_FS_SCL_LCNT Register**

**Offset** : 0x20

## **Description**

Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register

|_Table 460._<br>_IC_FS_SCL_LCNT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|**IC_FS_SCL_LCNT**: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction<br>can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock<br>low period count for fast speed. It is used in high-speed mode to send the<br>Master Code and START BYTE or General CALL. For more information, refer to<br>'IC_CLK Frequency Configuration'.<br>This register goes away and becomes read-only returning 0s if<br>IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE = standard.<br>This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled, which<br>corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times<br>have no effect.<br>The minimum valid value is 8; hardware prevents values less than this being<br>written, and if attempted results in 8 being set. For designs with<br>APB_DATA_WIDTH = 8 the order of programming is important to ensure the<br>correct operation of the DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed<br>first. Then the upper byte is programmed. If the value is less than 8 then the<br>count value gets changed to 8.|RW|0x000d|



## **I2C: IC_INTR_STAT Register**

**Offset** : 0x2c

## **Description**

I2C Interrupt Status Register

Each bit in this register has a corresponding mask bit in the IC_INTR_MASK register. These bits are cleared by reading the matching interrupt clear register. The unmasked raw versions of these bits are available in the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT

4.3. I2C

**473**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 461._<br>_IC_INTR_STAT_<br>_Register_|register.|register.|register.|register.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:13|Reserved.|-|-|
||12|**R_RESTART_DET**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_RESTART_DET bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→INACTIVE: R_RESTART_DET interrupt is inactive|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: R_RESTART_DET interrupt is active|||
||11|**R_GEN_CALL**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_GEN_CALL bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→INACTIVE: R_GEN_CALL interrupt is inactive|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: R_GEN_CALL interrupt is active|||
||10|**R_START_DET**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_START_DET bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→INACTIVE: R_START_DET interrupt is inactive|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: R_START_DET interrupt is active|||
||9|**R_STOP_DET**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_STOP_DET bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→INACTIVE: R_STOP_DET interrupt is inactive|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: R_STOP_DET interrupt is active|||
||8|**R_ACTIVITY**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_ACTIVITY bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→INACTIVE: R_ACTIVITY interrupt is inactive|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: R_ACTIVITY interrupt is active|||
||7|**R_RX_DONE**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_RX_DONE bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||



4.3. I2C

**474**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_RX_DONE interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_RX_DONE interrupt is active|||
|6|**R_TX_ABRT**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_TX_ABRT<br>bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_TX_ABRT interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_TX_ABRT interrupt is active|||
|5|**R_RD_REQ**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_RD_REQ<br>bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_RD_REQ interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_RD_REQ interrupt is active|||
|4|**R_TX_EMPTY**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_TX_EMPTY bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_TX_EMPTY interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_TX_EMPTY interrupt is active|||
|3|**R_TX_OVER**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_TX_OVER<br>bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_TX_OVER interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_TX_OVER interrupt is active|||
|2|**R_RX_FULL**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_RX_FULL<br>bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_RX_FULL interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_RX_FULL interrupt is active|||
|1|**R_RX_OVER**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_RX_OVER bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||



4.3. I2C

**475**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x0→INACTIVE: R_RX_OVER interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: R_RX_OVER interrupt is active|||
|0|**R_RX_UNDER**: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of<br>R_RX_UNDER bit.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is active|||



## **I2C: IC_INTR_MASK Register**

**Offset** : 0x30

## **Description**

I2C Interrupt Mask Register.

These bits mask their corresponding interrupt status bits. This register is active low; a value of 0 masks the interrupt, whereas a value of 1 unmasks the interrupt.

_Table 462. IC_INTR_MASK Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:13|Reserved.|-|-|
|12|**M_RESTART_DET**: This bit masks the R_RESTART_DET interrupt in<br>IC_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: RESTART_DET interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: RESTART_DET interrupt is unmasked|||
|11|**M_GEN_CALL**: This bit masks the R_GEN_CALL interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: GEN_CALL interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: GEN_CALL interrupt is unmasked|||
|10|**M_START_DET**: This bit masks the R_START_DET interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: START_DET interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: START_DET interrupt is unmasked|||



4.3. I2C

**476**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|9|**M_STOP_DET**: This bit masks the R_STOP_DET interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: STOP_DET interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: STOP_DET interrupt is unmasked|||
|8|**M_ACTIVITY**: This bit masks the R_ACTIVITY interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: ACTIVITY interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: ACTIVITY interrupt is unmasked|||
|7|**M_RX_DONE**: This bit masks the R_RX_DONE interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: RX_DONE interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: RX_DONE interrupt is unmasked|||
|6|**M_TX_ABRT**: This bit masks the R_TX_ABRT interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: TX_ABORT interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: TX_ABORT interrupt is unmasked|||
|5|**M_RD_REQ**: This bit masks the R_RD_REQ interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: RD_REQ interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: RD_REQ interrupt is unmasked|||
|4|**M_TX_EMPTY**: This bit masks the R_TX_EMPTY interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: TX_EMPTY interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: TX_EMPTY interrupt is unmasked|||



4.3. I2C

**477**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|3|**M_TX_OVER**: This bit masks the R_TX_OVER interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: TX_OVER interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: TX_OVER interrupt is unmasked|||
|2|**M_RX_FULL**: This bit masks the R_RX_FULL interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: RX_FULL interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: RX_FULL interrupt is unmasked|||
|1|**M_RX_OVER**: This bit masks the R_RX_OVER interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: RX_OVER interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: RX_OVER interrupt is unmasked|||
|0|**M_RX_UNDER**: This bit masks the R_RX_UNDER interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT<br>register.<br>Reset value: 0x1|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ENABLED: RX_UNDER interrupt is masked|||
||0x1→DISABLED: RX_UNDER interrupt is unmasked|||



## **I2C: IC_RAW_INTR_STAT Register**

**Offset** : 0x34

## **Description**

I2C Raw Interrupt Status Register

Unlike the IC_INTR_STAT register, these bits are not masked so they always show the true status of the DW_apb_i2c.

|_Table 463._<br>_IC_RAW_INTR_STAT_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:13|Reserved.|-|-|



4.3. I2C

**478**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|12|**RESTART_DET**: Indicates whether a RESTART condition has occurred on the<br>I2C interface when DW_apb_i2c is operating in Slave mode and the slave is<br>being addressed. Enabled only when IC_SLV_RESTART_DET_EN=1.<br>Note: However, in high-speed mode or during a START BYTE transfer, the<br>RESTART comes before the address field as per the I2C protocol. In this case,<br>the slave is not the addressed slave when the RESTART is issued, therefore<br>DW_apb_i2c does not generate the RESTART_DET interrupt.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RESTART_DET interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RESTART_DET interrupt is active|||
|11|**GEN_CALL**: Set only when a General Call address is received and it is<br>acknowledged. It stays set until it is cleared either by disabling DW_apb_i2c or<br>when the CPU reads bit 0 of the IC_CLR_GEN_CALL register. DW_apb_i2c<br>stores the received data in the Rx buffer.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: GEN_CALL interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: GEN_CALL interrupt is active|||
|10|**START_DET**: Indicates whether a START or RESTART condition has occurred<br>on the I2C interface regardless of whether DW_apb_i2c is operating in slave or<br>master mode.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: START_DET interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: START_DET interrupt is active|||
|9|**STOP_DET**: Indicates whether a STOP condition has occurred on the I2C<br>interface regardless of whether DW_apb_i2c is operating in slave or master<br>mode.<br>In Slave Mode: - If IC_CON[7]=1’b1 (STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED), the STOP_DET<br>interrupt will be issued only if slave is addressed. Note: During a general call<br>address, this slave does not issue a STOP_DET interrupt if<br>STOP_DET_IF_ADDRESSED=1’b1, even if the slave responds to the general call<br>address by generating ACK. The STOP_DET interrupt is generated only when<br>the transmitted address matches the slave address (SAR). - If IC_CON[7]=1’b0<br>(STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED), the STOP_DET interrupt is issued irrespective of<br>whether it is being addressed. In Master Mode: - If IC_CON[10]=1’b1<br>(STOP_DET_IF_MASTER_ACTIVE),the STOP_DET interrupt will be issued only if<br>Master is active. - If IC_CON[10]=1’b0 (STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED),the<br>STOP_DET interrupt will be issued irrespective of whether master is active or<br>not. Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||



4.3. I2C

**479**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x0→INACTIVE: STOP_DET interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: STOP_DET interrupt is active|||
|8|**ACTIVITY**: This bit captures DW_apb_i2c activity and stays set until it is<br>cleared. There are four ways to clear it: - Disabling the DW_apb_i2c - Reading<br>the IC_CLR_ACTIVITY register - Reading the IC_CLR_INTR register - System<br>reset Once this bit is set, it stays set unless one of the four methods is used to<br>clear it. Even if the DW_apb_i2c module is idle, this bit remains set until<br>cleared, indicating that there was activity on the bus.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RAW_INTR_ACTIVITY interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RAW_INTR_ACTIVITY interrupt is active|||
|7|**RX_DONE**: When the DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-transmitter, this bit is set<br>to 1 if the master does not acknowledge a transmitted byte. This occurs on<br>the last byte of the transmission, indicating that the transmission is done.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RX_DONE interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RX_DONE interrupt is active|||
|6|**TX_ABRT**: This bit indicates if DW_apb_i2c, as an I2C transmitter, is unable to<br>complete the intended actions on the contents of the transmit FIFO. This<br>situation can occur both as an I2C master or an I2C slave, and is referred to as<br>a 'transmit abort'. When this bit is set to 1, the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register<br>indicates the reason why the transmit abort takes places.<br>Note: The DW_apb_i2c flushes/resets/empties the TX_FIFO and RX_FIFO<br>whenever there is a transmit abort caused by any of the events tracked by the<br>IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register. The FIFOs remains in this flushed state until<br>the register IC_CLR_TX_ABRT is read. Once this read is performed, the Tx FIFO<br>is then ready to accept more data bytes from the APB interface.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: TX_ABRT interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: TX_ABRT interrupt is active|||
|5|**RD_REQ**: This bit is set to 1 when DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave and another<br>I2C master is attempting to read data from DW_apb_i2c. The DW_apb_i2c<br>holds the I2C bus in a wait state (SCL=0) until this interrupt is serviced, which<br>means that the slave has been addressed by a remote master that is asking<br>for data to be transferred. The processor must respond to this interrupt and<br>then write the requested data to the IC_DATA_CMD register. This bit is set to 0<br>just after the processor reads the IC_CLR_RD_REQ register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



4.3. I2C

**480**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RD_REQ interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RD_REQ interrupt is active|||
|4|**TX_EMPTY**: The behavior of the TX_EMPTY interrupt status differs based on<br>the TX_EMPTY_CTRL selection in the IC_CON register. - When<br>TX_EMPTY_CTRL = 0: This bit is set to 1 when the transmit buffer is at or<br>below the threshold value set in the IC_TX_TL register. - When<br>TX_EMPTY_CTRL = 1: This bit is set to 1 when the transmit buffer is at or<br>below the threshold value set in the IC_TX_TL register and the transmission of<br>the address/data from the internal shift register for the most recently popped<br>command is completed. It is automatically cleared by hardware when the<br>buffer level goes above the threshold. When IC_ENABLE[0] is set to 0, the TX<br>FIFO is flushed and held in reset. There the TX FIFO looks like it has no data<br>within it, so this bit is set to 1, provided there is activity in the master or slave<br>state machines. When there is no longer any activity, then with ic_en=0, this bit<br>is set to 0.<br>Reset value: 0x0.|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: TX_EMPTY interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: TX_EMPTY interrupt is active|||
|3|**TX_OVER**: Set during transmit if the transmit buffer is filled to<br>IC_TX_BUFFER_DEPTH and the processor attempts to issue another I2C<br>command by writing to the IC_DATA_CMD register. When the module is<br>disabled, this bit keeps its level until the master or slave state machines go<br>into idle, and when ic_en goes to 0, this interrupt is cleared.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: TX_OVER interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: TX_OVER interrupt is active|||
|2|**RX_FULL**: Set when the receive buffer reaches or goes above the RX_TL<br>threshold in the IC_RX_TL register. It is automatically cleared by hardware<br>when buffer level goes below the threshold. If the module is disabled<br>(IC_ENABLE[0]=0), the RX FIFO is flushed and held in reset; therefore the RX<br>FIFO is not full. So this bit is cleared once the IC_ENABLE bit 0 is programmed<br>with a 0, regardless of the activity that continues.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RX_FULL interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RX_FULL interrupt is active|||



4.3. I2C

**481**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|**RX_OVER**: Set if the receive buffer is completely filled to<br>IC_RX_BUFFER_DEPTH and an additional byte is received from an external I2C<br>device. The DW_apb_i2c acknowledges this, but any data bytes received after<br>the FIFO is full are lost. If the module is disabled (IC_ENABLE[0]=0), this bit<br>keeps its level until the master or slave state machines go into idle, and when<br>ic_en goes to 0, this interrupt is cleared.<br>Note: If bit 9 of the IC_CON register (RX_FIFO_FULL_HLD_CTRL) is<br>programmed to HIGH, then the RX_OVER interrupt never occurs, because the<br>Rx FIFO never overflows.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RX_OVER interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RX_OVER interrupt is active|||
|0|**RX_UNDER**: Set if the processor attempts to read the receive buffer when it is<br>empty by reading from the IC_DATA_CMD register. If the module is disabled<br>(IC_ENABLE[0]=0), this bit keeps its level until the master or slave state<br>machines go into idle, and when ic_en goes to 0, this interrupt is cleared.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is inactive|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is active|||



## **I2C: IC_RX_TL Register**

**Offset** : 0x38

## **Description**

I2C Receive FIFO Threshold Register

_Table 464. IC_RX_TL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:0|**RX_TL**: Receive FIFO Threshold Level.<br>Controls the level of entries (or above) that triggers the RX_FULL interrupt (bit<br>2 in IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register). The valid range is 0-255, with the additional<br>restriction that hardware does not allow this value to be set to a value larger<br>than the depth of the buffer. If an attempt is made to do that, the actual value<br>set will be the maximum depth of the buffer. A value of 0 sets the threshold<br>for 1 entry, and a value of 255 sets the threshold for 256 entries.|RW|0x00|



## **I2C: IC_TX_TL Register**

**Offset** : 0x3c

## **Description**

I2C Transmit FIFO Threshold Register

4.3. I2C

**482**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 465. IC_TX_TL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:0|**TX_TL**: Transmit FIFO Threshold Level.<br>Controls the level of entries (or below) that trigger the TX_EMPTY interrupt (bit<br>4 in IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register). The valid range is 0-255, with the additional<br>restriction that it may not be set to value larger than the depth of the buffer. If<br>an attempt is made to do that, the actual value set will be the maximum depth<br>of the buffer. A value of 0 sets the threshold for 0 entries, and a value of 255<br>sets the threshold for 255 entries.|RW|0x00|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_INTR Register**

**Offset** : 0x40

## **Description**

Clear Combined and Individual Interrupt Register

_Table 466. IC_CLR_INTR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**CLR_INTR**: Read this register to clear the combined interrupt, all individual<br>interrupts, and the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register. This bit does not clear<br>hardware clearable interrupts but software clearable interrupts. Refer to Bit 9<br>of the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register for an exception to clearing<br>IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_RX_UNDER Register**

**Offset** : 0x44

## **Description**

Clear RX_UNDER Interrupt Register

|_Table 467._<br>_IC_CLR_RX_UNDER_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|**CLR_RX_UNDER**: Read this register to clear the RX_UNDER interrupt (bit 0) of<br>the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_RX_OVER Register**

**Offset** : 0x48

## **Description**

Clear RX_OVER Interrupt Register

_Table 468. IC_CLR_RX_OVER Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|



4.3. I2C

**483**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|**CLR_RX_OVER**: Read this register to clear the RX_OVER interrupt (bit 1) of the<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_TX_OVER Register**

**Offset** : 0x4c

## **Description**

Clear TX_OVER Interrupt Register

_Table 469. IC_CLR_TX_OVER Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**CLR_TX_OVER**: Read this register to clear the TX_OVER interrupt (bit 3) of the<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_RD_REQ Register**

**Offset** : 0x50

## **Description**

Clear RD_REQ Interrupt Register

_Table 470. IC_CLR_RD_REQ Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**CLR_RD_REQ**: Read this register to clear the RD_REQ interrupt (bit 5) of the<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_TX_ABRT Register**

**Offset** : 0x54

## **Description**

Clear TX_ABRT Interrupt Register

4.3. I2C

**484**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 471._<br>_IC_CLR_TX_ABRT_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 472._<br>_IC_CLR_RX_DONE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|**CLR_TX_ABRT**: Read this register to clear the TX_ABRT interrupt (bit 6) of the<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register, and the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register. This also<br>releases the TX FIFO from the flushed/reset state, allowing more writes to the<br>TX FIFO. Refer to Bit 9 of the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register for an exception<br>to clearing IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||**I2C: IC_CLR_RX_DONE Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x58<br>**Description**<br>Clear RX_DONE Interrupt Register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|**CLR_RX_DONE**: Read this register to clear the RX_DONE interrupt (bit 7) of the<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_ACTIVITY Register**

**Offset** : 0x5c

## **Description**

Clear ACTIVITY Interrupt Register

|_Table 473._<br>_IC_CLR_ACTIVITY_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|**CLR_ACTIVITY**: Reading this register clears the ACTIVITY interrupt if the I2C is<br>not active anymore. If the I2C module is still active on the bus, the ACTIVITY<br>interrupt bit continues to be set. It is automatically cleared by hardware if the<br>module is disabled and if there is no further activity on the bus. The value read<br>from this register to get status of the ACTIVITY interrupt (bit 8) of the<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_STOP_DET Register**

**Offset** : 0x60

## **Description**

Clear STOP_DET Interrupt Register

|_Table 474._<br>_IC_CLR_STOP_DET_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|



4.3. I2C

**485**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|0|**CLR_STOP_DET**: Read this register to clear the STOP_DET interrupt (bit 9) of<br>the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_START_DET Register**

**Offset** : 0x64

## **Description**

Clear START_DET Interrupt Register

_Table 475. IC_CLR_START_DET Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**CLR_START_DET**: Read this register to clear the START_DET interrupt (bit 10)<br>of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_GEN_CALL Register**

**Offset** : 0x68

## **Description**

Clear GEN_CALL Interrupt Register

_Table 476. IC_CLR_GEN_CALL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**CLR_GEN_CALL**: Read this register to clear the GEN_CALL interrupt (bit 11) of<br>IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_ENABLE Register**

**Offset** : 0x6c

## **Description**

I2C Enable Register

_Table 477. IC_ENABLE Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**TX_CMD_BLOCK**: In Master mode: - 1’b1: Blocks the transmission of data on<br>I2C bus even if Tx FIFO has data to transmit. - 1’b0: The transmission of data<br>starts on I2C bus automatically, as soon as the first data is available in the Tx<br>FIFO. Note: To block the execution of Master commands, set the<br>TX_CMD_BLOCK bit only when Tx FIFO is empty (IC_STATUS[2]==1) and<br>Master is in Idle state (IC_STATUS[5] == 0). Any further commands put in the<br>Tx FIFO are not executed until TX_CMD_BLOCK bit is unset. Reset value:<br>IC_TX_CMD_BLOCK_DEFAULT|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→NOT_BLOCKED: Tx Command execution not blocked|||



4.3. I2C

**486**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x1→BLOCKED: Tx Command execution blocked|||
|1|**ABORT**: When set, the controller initiates the transfer abort. - 0: ABORT not<br>initiated or ABORT done - 1: ABORT operation in progress The software can<br>abort the I2C transfer in master mode by setting this bit. The software can set<br>this bit only when ENABLE is already set; otherwise, the controller ignores any<br>write to ABORT bit. The software cannot clear the ABORT bit once set. In<br>response to an ABORT, the controller issues a STOP and flushes the Tx FIFO<br>after completing the current transfer, then sets the TX_ABORT interrupt after<br>the abort operation. The ABORT bit is cleared automatically after the abort<br>operation.<br>For a detailed description on how to abort I2C transfers, refer to 'Aborting I2C<br>Transfers'.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLE: ABORT operation not in progress|||
||0x1→ENABLED: ABORT operation in progress|||
|0|**ENABLE**: Controls whether the DW_apb_i2c is enabled. - 0: Disables<br>DW_apb_i2c (TX and RX FIFOs are held in an erased state) - 1: Enables<br>DW_apb_i2c Software can disable DW_apb_i2c while it is active. However, it is<br>important that care be taken to ensure that DW_apb_i2c is disabled properly. A<br>recommended procedure is described in 'Disabling DW_apb_i2c'.<br>When DW_apb_i2c is disabled, the following occurs: - The TX FIFO and RX<br>FIFO get flushed. - Status bits in the IC_INTR_STAT register are still active until<br>DW_apb_i2c goes into IDLE state. If the module is transmitting, it stops as well<br>as deletes the contents of the transmit buffer after the current transfer is<br>complete. If the module is receiving, the DW_apb_i2c stops the current<br>transfer at the end of the current byte and does not acknowledge the transfer.<br>In systems with asynchronous pclk and ic_clk when IC_CLK_TYPE parameter<br>set to asynchronous (1), there is a two ic_clk delay when enabling or disabling<br>the DW_apb_i2c. For a detailed description on how to disable DW_apb_i2c,<br>refer to 'Disabling DW_apb_i2c'<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: I2C is disabled|||
||0x1→ENABLED: I2C is enabled|||



## **I2C: IC_STATUS Register**

**Offset** : 0x70

## **Description**

I2C Status Register

This is a read-only register used to indicate the current transfer status and FIFO status. The status register may be read at any time. None of the bits in this register request an interrupt.

4.3. I2C

**487**

RP2040 Datasheet

When the I2C is disabled by writing 0 in bit 0 of the IC_ENABLE register: - Bits 1 and 2 are set to 1 - Bits 3 and 10 are set to 0 When the master or slave state machines goes to idle and ic_en=0: - Bits 5 and 6 are set to 0

|_Table 478. IC_STATUS_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:7|Reserved.|-|-|
||6|**SLV_ACTIVITY**: Slave FSM Activity Status. When the Slave Finite State<br>Machine (FSM) is not in the IDLE state, this bit is set. - 0: Slave FSM is in IDLE<br>state so the Slave part of DW_apb_i2c is not Active - 1: Slave FSM is not in<br>IDLE state so the Slave part of DW_apb_i2c is Active Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→IDLE: Slave is idle|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: Slave not idle|||
||5|**MST_ACTIVITY**: Master FSM Activity Status. When the Master Finite State<br>Machine (FSM) is not in the IDLE state, this bit is set. - 0: Master FSM is in<br>IDLE state so the Master part of DW_apb_i2c is not Active - 1: Master FSM is<br>not in IDLE state so the Master part of DW_apb_i2c is Active Note:<br>IC_STATUS[0]-that is, ACTIVITY bit-is the OR of SLV_ACTIVITY and<br>MST_ACTIVITY bits.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→IDLE: Master is idle|||
|||0x1→ACTIVE: Master not idle|||
||4|**RFF**: Receive FIFO Completely Full. When the receive FIFO is completely full,<br>this bit is set. When the receive FIFO contains one or more empty location, this<br>bit is cleared. - 0: Receive FIFO is not full - 1: Receive FIFO is full Reset value:<br>0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→NOT_FULL: Rx FIFO not full|||
|||0x1→FULL: Rx FIFO is full|||
||3|**RFNE**: Receive FIFO Not Empty. This bit is set when the receive FIFO contains<br>one or more entries; it is cleared when the receive FIFO is empty. - 0: Receive<br>FIFO is empty - 1: Receive FIFO is not empty Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→EMPTY: Rx FIFO is empty|||
|||0x1→NOT_EMPTY: Rx FIFO not empty|||
||2|**TFE**: Transmit FIFO Completely Empty. When the transmit FIFO is completely<br>empty, this bit is set. When it contains one or more valid entries, this bit is<br>cleared. This bit field does not request an interrupt. - 0: Transmit FIFO is not<br>empty - 1: Transmit FIFO is empty Reset value: 0x1|RO|0x1|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→NON_EMPTY: Tx FIFO not empty|||
|||0x1→EMPTY: Tx FIFO is empty|||



4.3. I2C

**488**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|**TFNF**: Transmit FIFO Not Full. Set when the transmit FIFO contains one or<br>more empty locations, and is cleared when the FIFO is full. - 0: Transmit FIFO<br>is full - 1: Transmit FIFO is not full Reset value: 0x1|RO|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→FULL: Tx FIFO is full|||
||0x1→NOT_FULL: Tx FIFO not full|||
|0|**ACTIVITY**: I2C Activity Status. Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: I2C is idle|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: I2C is active|||



## **I2C: IC_TXFLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x74

## **Description**

I2C Transmit FIFO Level Register This register contains the number of valid data entries in the transmit FIFO buffer. It is cleared whenever: - The I2C is disabled - There is a transmit abort - that is, TX_ABRT bit is set in the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register - The slave bulk transmit mode is aborted The register increments whenever data is placed into the transmit FIFO and decrements when data is taken from the transmit FIFO.

_Table 479. IC_TXFLR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:5|Reserved.|-|-|
|4:0|**TXFLR**: Transmit FIFO Level. Contains the number of valid data entries in the<br>transmit FIFO.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x00|



## **I2C: IC_RXFLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x78

## **Description**

I2C Receive FIFO Level Register This register contains the number of valid data entries in the receive FIFO buffer. It is cleared whenever: - The I2C is disabled - Whenever there is a transmit abort caused by any of the events tracked in IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE The register increments whenever data is placed into the receive FIFO and decrements when data is taken from the receive FIFO.

_Table 480. IC_RXFLR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:5|Reserved.|-|-|
|4:0|**RXFLR**: Receive FIFO Level. Contains the number of valid data entries in the<br>receive FIFO.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x00|



## **I2C: IC_SDA_HOLD Register**

**Offset** : 0x7c

4.3. I2C

**489**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

I2C SDA Hold Time Length Register

The bits [15:0] of this register are used to control the hold time of SDA during transmit in both slave and master mode (after SCL goes from HIGH to LOW).

The bits [23:16] of this register are used to extend the SDA transition (if any) whenever SCL is HIGH in the receiver in either master or slave mode.

Writes to this register succeed only when IC_ENABLE[0]=0.

The values in this register are in units of ic_clk period. The value programmed in IC_SDA_TX_HOLD must be greater than the minimum hold time in each mode (one cycle in master mode, seven cycles in slave mode) for the value to be implemented.

The programmed SDA hold time during transmit (IC_SDA_TX_HOLD) cannot exceed at any time the duration of the low part of scl. Therefore the programmed value cannot be larger than N_SCL_LOW-2, where N_SCL_LOW is the duration of the low part of the scl period measured in ic_clk cycles.

_Table 481. IC_SDA_HOLD Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
|23:16|**IC_SDA_RX_HOLD**: Sets the required SDA hold time in units of ic_clk period,<br>when DW_apb_i2c acts as a receiver.<br>Reset value: IC_DEFAULT_SDA_HOLD[23:16].|RW|0x00|
|15:0|**IC_SDA_TX_HOLD**: Sets the required SDA hold time in units of ic_clk period,<br>when DW_apb_i2c acts as a transmitter.<br>Reset value: IC_DEFAULT_SDA_HOLD[15:0].|RW|0x0001|



## **I2C: IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE Register**

**Offset** : 0x80

## **Description**

I2C Transmit Abort Source Register

This register has 32 bits that indicate the source of the TX_ABRT bit. Except for Bit 9, this register is cleared whenever the IC_CLR_TX_ABRT register or the IC_CLR_INTR register is read. To clear Bit 9, the source of the ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT must be fixed first; RESTART must be enabled (IC_CON[5]=1), the SPECIAL bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[11]), or the GC_OR_START bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[10]).

Once the source of the ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is fixed, then this bit can be cleared in the same manner as other bits in this register. If the source of the ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is not fixed before attempting to clear this bit, Bit 9 clears for one cycle and is then re-asserted.

||one cycle|and is then re-asserted.|||
|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Table 482._<br>_IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:23|**TX_FLUSH_CNT**: This field indicates the number of Tx FIFO Data Commands<br>which are flushed due to TX_ABRT interrupt. It is cleared whenever I2C is<br>disabled.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Slave-Transmitter|RO|0x000|
||22:17|Reserved.|-|-|



4.3. I2C

**490**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|16|**ABRT_USER_ABRT**: This is a master-mode-only bit. Master has detected the<br>transfer abort (IC_ENABLE[1])<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_USER_ABRT_VOID: Transfer abort detected by master- scenario<br>not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_USER_ABRT_GENERATED: Transfer abort detected by master|||
|15|**ABRT_SLVRD_INTX**: 1: When the processor side responds to a slave mode<br>request for data to be transmitted to a remote master and user writes a 1 in<br>CMD (bit 8) of IC_DATA_CMD register.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Slave-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_SLVRD_INTX_VOID: Slave trying to transmit to remote master in<br>read mode- scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_SLVRD_INTX_GENERATED: Slave trying to transmit to remote<br>master in read mode|||
|14|**ABRT_SLV_ARBLOST**: This field indicates that a Slave has lost the bus while<br>transmitting data to a remote master. IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE[12] is set at the<br>same time. Note: Even though the slave never 'owns' the bus, something could<br>go wrong on the bus. This is a fail safe check. For instance, during a data<br>transmission at the low-to-high transition of SCL, if what is on the data bus is<br>not what is supposed to be transmitted, then DW_apb_i2c no longer own the<br>bus.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Slave-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_SLV_ARBLOST_VOID: Slave lost arbitration to remote master-<br>scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_SLV_ARBLOST_GENERATED: Slave lost arbitration to remote<br>master|||
|13|**ABRT_SLVFLUSH_TXFIFO**: This field specifies that the Slave has received a<br>read command and some data exists in the TX FIFO, so the slave issues a<br>TX_ABRT interrupt to flush old data in TX FIFO.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Slave-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||



4.3. I2C

**491**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x0→ABRT_SLVFLUSH_TXFIFO_VOID: Slave flushes existing data in TX-FIFO<br>upon getting read command- scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_SLVFLUSH_TXFIFO_GENERATED: Slave flushes existing data in<br>TX-FIFO upon getting read command|||
|12|**ARB_LOST**: This field specifies that the Master has lost arbitration, or if<br>IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE[14] is also set, then the slave transmitter has lost<br>arbitration.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Slave-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_LOST_VOID: Master or Slave-Transmitter lost arbitration-<br>scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_LOST_GENERATED: Master or Slave-Transmitter lost arbitration|||
|11|**ABRT_MASTER_DIS**: This field indicates that the User tries to initiate a Master<br>operation with the Master mode disabled.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_MASTER_DIS_VOID: User initiating master operation when<br>MASTER disabled- scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_MASTER_DIS_GENERATED: User initiating master operation<br>when MASTER disabled|||
|10|**ABRT_10B_RD_NORSTRT**: This field indicates that the restart is disabled<br>(IC_RESTART_EN bit (IC_CON[5]) =0) and the master sends a read command<br>in 10-bit addressing mode.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Receiver|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_10B_RD_VOID: Master not trying to read in 10Bit addressing<br>mode when RESTART disabled|||
||0x1→ABRT_10B_RD_GENERATED: Master trying to read in 10Bit addressing<br>mode when RESTART disabled|||



4.3. I2C

**492**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|9|**ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT**: To clear Bit 9, the source of the<br>ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT must be fixed first; restart must be enabled<br>(IC_CON[5]=1), the SPECIAL bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[11]), or the<br>GC_OR_START bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[10]). Once the source of the<br>ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is fixed, then this bit can be cleared in the same<br>manner as other bits in this register. If the source of the<br>ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is not fixed before attempting to clear this bit, bit 9<br>clears for one cycle and then gets reasserted. When this field is set to 1, the<br>restart is disabled (IC_RESTART_EN bit (IC_CON[5]) =0) and the user is trying<br>to send a START Byte.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT_VOID: User trying to send START byte when<br>RESTART disabled- scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT_GENERATED: User trying to send START byte<br>when RESTART disabled|||
|8|**ABRT_HS_NORSTRT**: This field indicates that the restart is disabled<br>(IC_RESTART_EN bit (IC_CON[5]) =0) and the user is trying to use the master<br>to transfer data in High Speed mode.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_HS_NORSTRT_VOID: User trying to switch Master to HS mode<br>when RESTART disabled- scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_HS_NORSTRT_GENERATED: User trying to switch Master to HS<br>mode when RESTART disabled|||
|7|**ABRT_SBYTE_ACKDET**: This field indicates that the Master has sent a START<br>Byte and the START Byte was acknowledged (wrong behavior).<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_SBYTE_ACKDET_VOID: ACK detected for START byte- scenario<br>not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_SBYTE_ACKDET_GENERATED: ACK detected for START byte|||
|6|**ABRT_HS_ACKDET**: This field indicates that the Master is in High Speed mode<br>and the High Speed Master code was acknowledged (wrong behavior).<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master|RO|0x0|



4.3. I2C

**493**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_HS_ACK_VOID: HS Master code ACKed in HS Mode- scenario not<br>present|||
||0x1→ABRT_HS_ACK_GENERATED: HS Master code ACKed in HS Mode|||
|5|**ABRT_GCALL_READ**: This field indicates that DW_apb_i2c in the master mode<br>has sent a General Call but the user programmed the byte following the<br>General Call to be a read from the bus (IC_DATA_CMD[9] is set to 1).<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_GCALL_READ_VOID: GCALL is followed by read from bus-<br>scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_GCALL_READ_GENERATED: GCALL is followed by read from bus|||
|4|**ABRT_GCALL_NOACK**: This field indicates that DW_apb_i2c in master mode<br>has sent a General Call and no slave on the bus acknowledged the General<br>Call.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_GCALL_NOACK_VOID: GCALL not ACKed by any slave-scenario<br>not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_GCALL_NOACK_GENERATED: GCALL not ACKed by any slave|||
|3|**ABRT_TXDATA_NOACK**: This field indicates the master-mode only bit. When<br>the master receives an acknowledgement for the address, but when it sends<br>data byte(s) following the address, it did not receive an acknowledge from the<br>remote slave(s).<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→ABRT_TXDATA_NOACK_VOID: Transmitted data non-ACKed by<br>addressed slave-scenario not present|||
||0x1→ABRT_TXDATA_NOACK_GENERATED: Transmitted data not ACKed by<br>addressed slave|||
|2|**ABRT_10ADDR2_NOACK**: This field indicates that the Master is in 10-bit<br>address mode and that the second address byte of the 10-bit address was not<br>acknowledged by any slave.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver|RO|0x0|



4.3. I2C

**494**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: This abort is not generated|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: Byte 2 of 10Bit Address not ACKed by any slave|||
|1|**ABRT_10ADDR1_NOACK**: This field indicates that the Master is in 10-bit<br>address mode and the first 10-bit address byte was not acknowledged by any<br>slave.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: This abort is not generated|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: Byte 1 of 10Bit Address not ACKed by any slave|||
|0|**ABRT_7B_ADDR_NOACK**: This field indicates that the Master is in 7-bit<br>addressing mode and the address sent was not acknowledged by any slave.<br>Reset value: 0x0<br>Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: This abort is not generated|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: This abort is generated because of NOACK for 7-bit address|||



## **I2C: IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ONLY Register**

**Offset** : 0x84

## **Description**

Generate Slave Data NACK Register

The register is used to generate a NACK for the data part of a transfer when DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-receiver. This register only exists when the IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ONLY parameter is set to 1. When this parameter disabled, this register does not exist and writing to the register’s address has no effect.

A write can occur on this register if both of the following conditions are met: - DW_apb_i2c is disabled (IC_ENABLE[0] = 0) - Slave part is inactive (IC_STATUS[6] = 0) Note: The IC_STATUS[6] is a register read-back location for the internal slv_activity signal; the user should poll this before writing the ic_slv_data_nack_only bit.

_Table 483. IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ ONLY Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**NACK**: Generate NACK. This NACK generation only occurs when DW_apb_i2c<br>is a slave-receiver. If this register is set to a value of 1, it can only generate a<br>NACK after a data byte is received; hence, the data transfer is aborted and the<br>data received is not pushed to the receive buffer.<br>When the register is set to a value of 0, it generates NACK/ACK, depending on<br>normal criteria. - 1: generate NACK after data byte received - 0: generate<br>NACK/ACK normally Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||



4.3. I2C

**495**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
||0x0→DISABLED: Slave receiver generates NACK normally|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Slave receiver generates NACK upon data reception only|||



## **I2C: IC_DMA_CR Register**

**Offset** : 0x88

## **Description**

DMA Control Register

The register is used to enable the DMA Controller interface operation. There is a separate bit for transmit and receive. This can be programmed regardless of the state of IC_ENABLE.

_Table 484. IC_DMA_CR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:2|Reserved.|-|-|
|1|**TDMAE**: Transmit DMA Enable. This bit enables/disables the transmit FIFO<br>DMA channel. Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: transmit FIFO DMA channel disabled|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Transmit FIFO DMA channel enabled|||
|0|**RDMAE**: Receive DMA Enable. This bit enables/disables the receive FIFO DMA<br>channel. Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Receive FIFO DMA channel disabled|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Receive FIFO DMA channel enabled|||



## **I2C: IC_DMA_TDLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x8c

## **Description**

DMA Transmit Data Level Register

|_Table 485._<br>_IC_DMA_TDLR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
||3:0|**DMATDL**: Transmit Data Level. This bit field controls the level at which a DMA<br>request is made by the transmit logic. It is equal to the watermark level; that is,<br>the dma_tx_req signal is generated when the number of valid data entries in<br>the transmit FIFO is equal to or below this field value, and TDMAE = 1.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_DMA_RDLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x90

## **Description**

I2C Receive Data Level Register

4.3. I2C

**496**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 486. IC_DMA_RDLR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:4|Reserved.|-|-|
|3:0|**DMARDL**: Receive Data Level. This bit field controls the level at which a DMA<br>request is made by the receive logic. The watermark level = DMARDL+1; that<br>is, dma_rx_req is generated when the number of valid data entries in the<br>receive FIFO is equal to or more than this field value + 1, and RDMAE =1. For<br>instance, when DMARDL is 0, then dma_rx_req is asserted when 1 or more<br>data entries are present in the receive FIFO.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RW|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_SDA_SETUP Register**

**Offset** : 0x94

## **Description**

I2C SDA Setup Register

This register controls the amount of time delay (in terms of number of ic_clk clock periods) introduced in the rising edge of SCL - relative to SDA changing - when DW_apb_i2c services a read request in a slave-transmitter operation. The relevant I2C requirement is tSU:DAT (note 4) as detailed in the I2C Bus Specification. This register must be programmed with a value equal to or greater than 2.

Writes to this register succeed only when IC_ENABLE[0] = 0.

Note: The length of setup time is calculated using [(IC_SDA_SETUP - 1) * (ic_clk_period)], so if the user requires 10 ic_clk periods of setup time, they should program a value of 11. The IC_SDA_SETUP register is only used by the DW_apb_i2c when operating as a slave transmitter.

_Table 487. IC_SDA_SETUP Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:0|**SDA_SETUP**: SDA Setup. It is recommended that if the required delay is<br>1000ns, then for an ic_clk frequency of 10 MHz, IC_SDA_SETUP should be<br>programmed to a value of 11. IC_SDA_SETUP must be programmed with a<br>minimum value of 2.|RW|0x64|



## **I2C: IC_ACK_GENERAL_CALL Register**

**Offset** : 0x98

## **Description**

I2C ACK General Call Register

The register controls whether DW_apb_i2c responds with a ACK or NACK when it receives an I2C General Call address.

This register is applicable only when the DW_apb_i2c is in slave mode.

_Table 488. IC_ACK_GENERAL_CA LL Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**ACK_GEN_CALL**: ACK General Call. When set to 1, DW_apb_i2c responds with<br>a ACK (by asserting ic_data_oe) when it receives a General Call. Otherwise,<br>DW_apb_i2c responds with a NACK (by negating ic_data_oe).|RW|0x1|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: Generate NACK for a General Call|||
||0x1→ENABLED: Generate ACK for a General Call|||



4.3. I2C

**497**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **I2C: IC_ENABLE_STATUS Register**

**Offset** : 0x9c

## **Description**

I2C Enable Status Register

The register is used to report the DW_apb_i2c hardware status when the IC_ENABLE[0] register is set from 1 to 0; that is, when DW_apb_i2c is disabled.

If IC_ENABLE[0] has been set to 1, bits 2:1 are forced to 0, and bit 0 is forced to 1.

If IC_ENABLE[0] has been set to 0, bits 2:1 is only be valid as soon as bit 0 is read as '0'.

Note: When IC_ENABLE[0] has been set to 0, a delay occurs for bit 0 to be read as 0 because disabling the DW_apb_i2c depends on I2C bus activities.

_Table 489. IC_ENABLE_STATUS Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**SLV_RX_DATA_LOST**: Slave Received Data Lost. This bit indicates if a Slave-<br>Receiver operation has been aborted with at least one data byte received from<br>an I2C transfer due to the setting bit 0 of IC_ENABLE from 1 to 0. When read<br>as 1, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have been actively engaged in an aborted I2C<br>transfer (with matching address) and the data phase of the I2C transfer has<br>been entered, even though a data byte has been responded with a NACK.<br>Note: If the remote I2C master terminates the transfer with a STOP condition<br>before the DW_apb_i2c has a chance to NACK a transfer, and IC_ENABLE[0]<br>has been set to 0, then this bit is also set to 1.<br>When read as 0, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have been disabled without being<br>actively involved in the data phase of a Slave-Receiver transfer.<br>Note: The CPU can safely read this bit when IC_EN (bit 0) is read as 0.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: Slave RX Data is not lost|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: Slave RX Data is lost|||



4.3. I2C

**498**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|**SLV_DISABLED_WHILE_BUSY**: Slave Disabled While Busy (Transmit, Receive).<br>This bit indicates if a potential or active Slave operation has been aborted due<br>to the setting bit 0 of the IC_ENABLE register from 1 to 0. This bit is set when<br>the CPU writes a 0 to the IC_ENABLE register while:<br>(a) DW_apb_i2c is receiving the address byte of the Slave-Transmitter<br>operation from a remote master;<br>OR,<br>(b) address and data bytes of the Slave-Receiver operation from a remote<br>master.<br>When read as 1, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have forced a NACK during any<br>part of an I2C transfer, irrespective of whether the I2C address matches the<br>slave address set in DW_apb_i2c (IC_SAR register) OR if the transfer is<br>completed before IC_ENABLE is set to 0 but has not taken effect.<br>Note: If the remote I2C master terminates the transfer with a STOP condition<br>before the DW_apb_i2c has a chance to NACK a transfer, and IC_ENABLE[0]<br>has been set to 0, then this bit will also be set to 1.<br>When read as 0, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have been disabled when there is<br>master activity, or when the I2C bus is idle.<br>Note: The CPU can safely read this bit when IC_EN (bit 0) is read as 0.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→INACTIVE: Slave is disabled when it is idle|||
||0x1→ACTIVE: Slave is disabled when it is active|||
|0|**IC_EN**: ic_en Status. This bit always reflects the value driven on the output port<br>ic_en. - When read as 1, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to be in an enabled state. -<br>When read as 0, DW_apb_i2c is deemed completely inactive. Note: The CPU<br>can safely read this bit anytime. When this bit is read as 0, the CPU can safely<br>read SLV_RX_DATA_LOST (bit 2) and SLV_DISABLED_WHILE_BUSY (bit 1).<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→DISABLED: I2C disabled|||
||0x1→ENABLED: I2C enabled|||



## **I2C: IC_FS_SPKLEN Register**

**Offset** : 0xa0

## **Description**

I2C SS, FS or FM+ spike suppression limit

This register is used to store the duration, measured in ic_clk cycles, of the longest spike that is filtered out by the spike suppression logic when the component is operating in SS, FS or FM+ modes. The relevant I2C requirement is tSP (table

4.3. I2C

**499**

RP2040 Datasheet

4) as detailed in the I2C Bus Specification. This register must be programmed with a minimum value of 1.

|_Table 490._<br>_IC_FS_SPKLEN_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**IC_FS_SPKLEN**: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction can<br>take place to ensure stable operation. This register sets the duration,<br>measured in ic_clk cycles, of the longest spike in the SCL or SDA lines that will<br>be filtered out by the spike suppression logic. This register can be written only<br>when the I2C interface is disabled which corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0]<br>register being set to 0. Writes at other times have no effect. The minimum<br>valid value is 1; hardware prevents values less than this being written, and if<br>attempted results in 1 being set. or more information, refer to 'Spike<br>Suppression'.|RW|0x07|



## **I2C: IC_CLR_RESTART_DET Register**

**Offset** : 0xa8

## **Description**

Clear RESTART_DET Interrupt Register

|_Table 491._<br>_IC_CLR_RESTART_DET_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|**CLR_RESTART_DET**: Read this register to clear the RESTART_DET interrupt<br>(bit 12) of IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.<br>Reset value: 0x0|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_COMP_PARAM_1 Register**

**Offset** : 0xf4

## **Description**

Component Parameter Register 1

Note This register is not implemented and therefore reads as 0. If it was implemented it would be a constant read-only register that contains encoded information about the component’s parameter settings. Fields shown below are the settings for those parameters

|_Table 492._<br>_IC_COMP_PARAM_1_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:24|Reserved.|-|-|
||23:16|**TX_BUFFER_DEPTH**: TX Buffer Depth = 16|RO|0x00|
||15:8|**RX_BUFFER_DEPTH**: RX Buffer Depth = 16|RO|0x00|
||7|**ADD_ENCODED_PARAMS**: Encoded parameters not visible|RO|0x0|
||6|**HAS_DMA**: DMA handshaking signals are enabled|RO|0x0|
||5|**INTR_IO**: COMBINED Interrupt outputs|RO|0x0|
||4|**HC_COUNT_VALUES**: Programmable count values for each mode.|RO|0x0|
||3:2|**MAX_SPEED_MODE**: MAX SPEED MODE = FAST MODE|RO|0x0|
||1:0|**APB_DATA_WIDTH**: APB data bus width is 32 bits|RO|0x0|



## **I2C: IC_COMP_VERSION Register**

4.3. I2C

**500**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Offset** : 0xf8

**Description**

I2C Component Version Register

|_Table 493._<br>_IC_COMP_VERSION_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:0|**IC_COMP_VERSION**|RO|0x3230312a|



## **I2C: IC_COMP_TYPE Register**

**Offset** : 0xfc **Description**

||**Description**|**Description**|**Description**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Table 494._<br>_IC_COMP_TYPE_<br>_Register_|I2C Component Type Register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|**IC_COMP_TYPE**: Designware Component Type number = 0x44_57_01_40. This<br>assigned unique hex value is constant and is derived from the two ASCII<br>letters 'DW' followed by a 16-bit unsigned number.|RO|0x44570140|
