## **4.5. PWM**

## **4.5.1. Overview**

Pulse width modulation (PWM) is a scheme where a digital signal provides a smoothly varying average voltage. This is achieved with positive pulses of some controlled width, at regular intervals. The fraction of time spent high is known as the duty cycle. This may be used to approximate an analog output, or control switchmode power electronics.

The RP2040 PWM block has 8 identical slices. Each slice can drive two PWM output signals, or measure the frequency or duty cycle of an input signal. This gives a total of up to 16 controllable PWM outputs. All 30 GPIO pins can be driven by the PWM block.

**521**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 103. A single PWM slice. A 16-bit counter counts from 0 up to some programmed value, and then wraps to zero, or counts back down again, depending on PWM mode. The A and B outputs transition high and low based on the current count value and the preprogrammed A and B thresholds. The counter advances based on a number of events: it may be freerunning, or gated by level or edge of an input signal on the B pin. A fractional divider slows the overall count rate for finer control of output frequency._

**==> picture [382 x 134] intentionally omitted <==**

Each PWM slice is equipped with the following:

- [16-bit counter]

- [8.4 fractional clock divider]

- [Two independent output channels, duty cycle from 0% to 100% ] **[inclusive]**

- [Dual slope and trailing edge modulation]

- [Edge-sensitive input mode for frequency measurement]

- [Level-sensitive input mode for duty cycle measurement]

- [Configurable counter wrap value]

   - [Wrap and level registers are double buffered and can be changed race-free while PWM is running]

- [Interrupt request and DMA request on counter wrap]

- [Phase can be precisely advanced or retarded while running (increments of one count)]

Slices can be enabled or disabled simultaneously via a single, global control register. The slices then run in perfect lockstep, so that more complex power circuitry can be switched by the outputs of multiple slices.

## **4.5.2. Programmer’s Model**

All 30 GPIO pins on RP2040 can be used for PWM:

_Table 515. Mapping of PWM channels to GPIO pins on RP2040. This is also shown in the main GPIO function table, Table 279_

|GPIO|0|1|2<br>3|4|5|6|7|8|9<br>1|0|11|12<br>|13|14|15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|PWM Channel|0A|0B|1A<br>1|B<br>2A|2B|3A|3B|4A|4B<br>5|A|5B|6A<br>|6B|7A|7B|
|GPIO|16|17|18<br>1|9<br>20|21|22|23|24|25<br>2|6|27|28<br>|29|||
|PWM Channel|0A|0B|1A<br>1|B<br>2A|2B|3A|3B|4A|4B<br>5|A|5B|6A<br>|6B|||



- [The 16 PWM channels (8 2-channel slices) appear on GPIO0 to GPIO15, in the order PWM0 A, PWM0 B, PWM1 A…]

- [This repeats for GPIO16 to GPIO29. GPIO16 is PWM0 A, GPIO17 is PWM0 B, so on up to PWM6 B on GPIO29]

- [The same PWM output can be selected on two GPIO pins; the same signal will appear on each GPIO.]

- [If a PWM B pin is used as an input, and is selected on multiple GPIO pins, then the PWM slice will see the logical] OR of those two GPIO inputs

## **4.5.2.1. Pulse Width Modulation**

The PWM hardware functions by continuously comparing the input value to a free-running counter. This produces a toggling output where the amount of time spent at the high output level is proportional to the input value. The fraction of time spent at the high signal level is known as the duty cycle of the signal.

**522**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

The counting period is controlled by the TOP register, with a maximum possible period of 65536 cycles, as the counter and TOP are 16 bits in size. The input values are configured via the CC register.

**==> picture [484 x 232] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 104. The<br>counter repeatedly Input (Count)<br>Count<br>counts from 0 to TOP,<br>TOP<br>forming a sawtooth Counter compare level<br>shape. The counter is Counter<br>continuously<br>compared with some<br>TOP/3<br>input value. When the<br>input value is higherthan the counter, the 0 T 2T 3T t<br>output is driven high.<br>Otherwise, the output Output (Pulse)<br>is low. The output V<br>IOVDD<br>period T is defined by GPIO pulse output<br>the TOP value of the<br>counter, and how fast<br>the counter is<br>configured to count.<br>The voltage, as a fraction average  output 0 T 2T 3T t<br>of the IO power<br>supply, is the input<br>value divided by the This example shows the counting period and the A and B counter compare levels being configured on one of RP2040’s<br>counter period (TOP + PWM slices.<br>1)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pwm/hello_pwm/hello_pwm.c Lines 14 - 29_

14 _// Tell GPIO 0 and 1 they are allocated to the PWM_ 15     gpio_set_function(0, GPIO_FUNC_PWM); 16     gpio_set_function(1, GPIO_FUNC_PWM); 17 18 _// Find out which PWM slice is connected to GPIO 0 (it's slice 0)_ 19     uint slice_num = pwm_gpio_to_slice_num(0); 20 21 _// Set period of 4 cycles (0 to 3 inclusive)_ 22     pwm_set_wrap(slice_num, 3); 23 _// Set channel A output high for one cycle before dropping_ 24     pwm_set_chan_level(slice_num, PWM_CHAN_A, 1); 25 _// Set initial B output high for three cycles before dropping_ 26     pwm_set_chan_level(slice_num, PWM_CHAN_B, 3); 27 _// Set the PWM running_ 28     pwm_set_enabled(slice_num, true);

Figure 105 shows how the PWM hardware operates once it has been configured in this way.

**523**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 105. The slice counts repeatedly from 0 to 3, which is configured as the TOP value. The output waves therefore have a period of 4. Output A is high for 1 cycle in 4, so the average output voltage is 1/4 of the IO supply voltage. Output B is high for 3 cycles in every 4. Note the rising edges of A and B are always aligned._

_Figure 106. In phasecorrect mode, the counter counts back down from TOP to 0 once it reaches TOP._

**==> picture [297 x 48] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Count 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3<br>A<br>B<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The default behaviour of a PWM slice is to count upward until the value of the TOP register is reached, and then immediately wrap to 0. PWM slices also offer a phase-correct mode, enabled by setting CSR_PH_CORRECT to 1, where the counter starts to count downward after reaching TOP, until it reaches 0 again.

It is called phase-correct mode because the pulse is always centred on the same point, no matter the duty cycle. In other words, its phase is not a function of duty cycle. The output frequency is halved when phase-correct mode is enabled.

**==> picture [297 x 192] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Input (Count)<br>Count<br>TOP<br>Counter compare level<br>Counter<br>TOP/3<br>0 T 2T 3T t<br>Output (Pulse)<br>V<br>IOVDD<br>GPIO pulse output<br>0 T 2T 3T t<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.5.2.2. 0% and 100% Duty Cycle**

The RP2040 PWM can produce toggle-free 0% and 100% duty cycle output.

**==> picture [356 x 192] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 107. Glitch-free<br>0% duty cycle output Input (Count)<br>Count<br>for CC = 0, and glitch-<br>TOP<br>free 100% duty cycle Counter compare level<br>output for CC = TOP + Counter<br>1<br>0 T 2T 3T t<br>Output (Pulse)<br>V<br>IOVDD<br>GPIO pulse output<br>0 T 2T 3T t<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


A CC value of 0 will produce a 0% output, i.e. the output signal is always low. A CC value of TOP + 1 (i.e. equal to the period, in non-phase-correct mode) will produce a 100% output. For example, if TOP is programmed to 254, the counter will have a period of 255 cycles, and CC values in the range of 0 to 255 inclusive will produce duty cycles in the range 0% to 100% inclusive.

Glitch-free output at 0% and 100% is important e.g. to avoid switching losses when a MOSFET is controlled at its minimum and maximum current levels.

**524**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.5.2.3. Double Buffering**

Figure 108 shows how a change in input value will produce a change in output duty cycle. This can be used to approximate some analog waveform such as a sine wave.

**==> picture [356 x 192] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 108. The input<br>value varies with each Input (Count)<br>Count<br>counter period: first<br>TOP<br>TOP / 3, then 2 × TOP Counter compare level<br>/ 3, and finally TOP + 1 Counter<br>2×TOP/3<br>for 100% duty cycle.<br>Each increase in the<br>TOP/3<br>input value causes a<br>correspondingincrease in the output 0 T 2T 3T t<br>duty cycle.<br>Output (Pulse)<br>V<br>IOVDD<br>GPIO pulse output<br>0 T/3 T 5T/3 2T 3T t<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


In Figure 108, the input value only changes at the instant where the counter wraps through 0. Figure 109 shows what happens if the input value is allowed to change at any other time: an unwanted glitch is produced at the output.

_Figure 109. The input value changes whilst the counter is midramp. This produces additional toggling at the output._

**==> picture [297 x 192] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Input (Count)<br>Count<br>TOP<br>Counter compare level<br>2×TOP/3 Counter<br>TOP/3<br>0 T 2T 3T t<br>Output (Pulse)<br>V<br>IOVDD<br>GPIO pulse output<br>0 T/3 T 5T/3 2T 3T t<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The behaviour becomes even more perplexing if the TOP register is also modified. It would be difficult for software to write to CC or TOP with the correct timing. To solve this, each slice has two copies of the CC and TOP registers: one copy which software can modify, and another, internal copy which is updated from the first register at the instant the counter wraps. Software can modify its copy of the register at will, but the changes are not captured by the PWM output until the next wrap.

Figure 110 shows the sequence of events where a software interrupt handler changes the value of CC_A each time the counter wraps.

**525**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 110. Each counter wrap causes the interrupt request signal to assert. The processor enters its interrupt handler, writes to its copy of the CC register, and clears the interrupt. When the counter wraps again, the latched version of the CC register is instantaneously updated with the most recent value written by software, and this value controls the duty cycle for the next period. The IRQ is reasserted so that software can write another fresh value to its copy of the CC register._

**==> picture [297 x 64] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Counter at top<br>IRQ<br>CC_A 0 1 2 3<br>CC_A latched 0 1 2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


There is no limitation on what values can be written to CC or TOP, or when they are written. In normal PWM mode (CSR_PH_CORRECT is 0) the latched copies are updated when the counter wraps to 0, which occurs once every TOP + 1 cycles. In phase-correct mode (CSR_PH_CORRECT is 1), the latched copies are updated on the 0 to 0 count transition, i.e. the point where the counter stops counting downward and begins to count upward again.

## **4.5.2.4. Clock Divider**

Each slice has a fractional clock divider, configured by the DIV register. This is an 8 integer bit, 4 fractional bit clock divider, which allows the count rate to be slowed by up to a factor of 256. The clock divider allows much lower output frequencies to be achieved — approximately 7.5Hz from a 125MHz system clock. Lower frequencies than this will require a system timer interrupt (Section 4.6)

It does this by generating an enable signal which gates the operation of the counter.

_Figure 111. The clock divider generates an enable signal. The counter only counts on cycles where this signal is high. A clock divisor of 1 causes the enable to be asserted on every cycle, so the counter counts by one on every system clock cycle. Higher divisors cause the count enable to be asserted less frequently. Fractional division achieves an average fractional counting rate by spacing some enable pulses further apart than others._

**==> picture [297 x 161] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
DIV_INT 1<br>DIV_FRAC .0<br>Counter enable<br>DIV_INT 3<br>DIV_FRAC .0<br>Counter enable<br>DIV_INT 2<br>DIV_FRAC .5<br>Counter enable<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The fractional divider is a first-order delta-sigma type.

The clock divider also allows the effective count range to be extended, when using level-sensitive or edge-sensitive modes to take duty cycle or frequency measurements.

## **4.5.2.5. Level-sensitive and Edge-sensitive Triggering**

**526**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [484 x 174] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 112. PWM slice<br>Event select Phase Phase<br>event selection. The Advance Retard<br>counter advances<br>when its enable input 1<br>is high, and this<br>enable is generated in Input<br>two sequential stages. (pin B) Fractional Clock  Count<br>EN<br>First, any one of four Divider (8.4) enable<br>event types (always Rising edge<br>on, pin B high, pin B<br>rise, pin B fall) can Falling edge<br>generate enable<br>pulses for the<br>fractional clock<br>divider. The divider<br>can reduce the rate of By default, each slice’s counter is free-running, and will count continuously whenever the slice is enabled. There are<br>the enable pulses, three other options available:<br>before passing them<br>on to the counter. • [[Count continuously when a high level is detected on the B pin]]<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


- [[Count continuously when a high level is detected on the B pin]]

- [Count once with each rising edge detected on the B pin]

- [Count once with each falling edge detected on the B pin]

These modes are selected by the DIVMODE field in each slice’s CSR. In free-running mode, the A and B pins are both outputs. In any other mode, the B pin becomes an input, and controls the operation of the counter. CC_B is ignored when not in free-running mode.

By allowing the slice to run for a fixed amount of time in level-sensitive or edge-sensitive mode, it’s possible to measure the duty cycle or frequency of an input signal. Due to the type of edge-detect circuit used, the low period and high period of the measured signal must both be strictly greater than the system clock period when taking frequency measurements.

The clock divider is still operational in level-sensitive and edge-sensitive mode. At maximum division (writing 0 to DIV_INT), the counter will only advance once per 256 high input cycles in level-sensitive modes, or once per 256 edges in edge-sensitive mode. This allows longer-running measurements to be taken, although the resolution is still just 16 bits.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pwm/measure_duty_cycle/measure_duty_cycle.c Lines 19 - 37_

19 float measure_duty_cycle(uint gpio) { 20 _// Only the PWM B pins can be used as inputs._ 21     assert(pwm_gpio_to_channel(gpio) == PWM_CHAN_B); 22     uint slice_num = pwm_gpio_to_slice_num(gpio); 23 24 _// Count once for every 100 cycles the PWM B input is high_ 25     pwm_config cfg = pwm_get_default_config(); 26     pwm_config_set_clkdiv_mode(&cfg, PWM_DIV_B_HIGH); 27     pwm_config_set_clkdiv(&cfg, 100); 28     pwm_init(slice_num, &cfg, false); 29     gpio_set_function(gpio, GPIO_FUNC_PWM); 30 31     pwm_set_enabled(slice_num, true); 32     sleep_ms(10); 33     pwm_set_enabled(slice_num, false); 34     float counting_rate = clock_get_hz(clk_sys) / 100; 35     float max_possible_count = counting_rate * 0.01; 36     return pwm_get_counter(slice_num) / max_possible_count; 37 }

## **4.5.2.6. Configuring PWM Period**

When free-running, the period of a PWM slice’s output (measured in system clock cycles) is controlled by three parameters:

**527**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

- [The ][TOP][ register]

- [Whether phase-correct mode is enabled (][CSR_PH_CORRECT][)]

- [The ][DIV][ register]

The slice counts from 0 to TOP, and then either wraps, or begins counting backward, depending on the setting of CSR_PH_CORRECT. The rate of counting is slowed by the clock divider, with a maximum speed of one count per cycle, and a

minimum speed of one count per cycles. The period in clock cycles can be calculated as:

**==> picture [296 x 22] intentionally omitted <==**

The output frequency can then be determined based on the system clock frequency:

**==> picture [318 x 28] intentionally omitted <==**

## **4.5.2.7. Interrupt Request (IRQ) and DMA Data Request (DREQ)**

The PWM block has a single IRQ output. The interrupt status registers INTR, INTS and INTE allow software to control which slices will assert this IRQ output, to check which slices are the cause of the IRQ’s assertion, and to clear and acknowledge the interrupt.

A slice generates an interrupt request each time its counter wraps (or, if CSR_PH_CORRECT is enabled, each time the counter returns to 0). This sets the flag corresponding to this slice in the raw interrupt status register, INTR. If this slice’s interrupt is enabled in INTE, then this flag will cause the PWM block’s IRQ to be asserted, and the flag will also appear in the masked interrupt status register INTS.

Flags are cleared by writing a mask back to INTR. This is demonstrated in the "LED fade" SDK example.

This scheme allows multiple slices to generate interrupts concurrently, and a system interrupt handler to determine which slices caused the most recent interruption, and handle appropriately. Normally this would mean reloading those slices' TOP or CC registers, but the PWM block can also be used as a source of regular interrupt requests for non-PWMrelated purposes.

The same pulse which sets the interrupt flag in INTR is also available as a one-cycle data request to the RP2040 system DMA. For each cycle the DMA sees a DREQ asserted, it will make one data transfer to its programmed location, in as timely a manner as possible. In combination with the double-buffered behaviour of CC and TOP, this allows the DMA to efficiently stream data to a PWM slice at a rate of one transfer per counter period. Alternatively, a PWM slice could serve as a pacing timer for DMA transfers to some other memory-mapped hardware.

## **4.5.2.8. On-the-fly Phase Adjustment**

For some applications it is necessary to control the phase relationship between two PWM outputs on different slices.

The global enable register EN contains an alias of the CSR_EN flag for each slice, and allows multiple slices to be started and stopped simultaneously. If two slices with the same output frequency are started at the same time, they will run in perfect lockstep, and have a fixed phase relationship, determined by the initial counter values.

The CSR_PH_ADV and CSR_PH_RET fields will advance or retard a slice’s output phase by one count, whilst it is running. They do so by inserting or deleting pulses from the clock enable (the output of the clock divider), as shown in Figure 113.

**528**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 214] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 113. The clock<br>enable signal, output Clock<br>by the clock divider,<br>controls the rate of<br>counting. Phase DIV_INT 2<br>advance forces the<br>Clock enable<br>clock enable high on<br>cycles where it is low, Count 0 1 2 3 4 5<br>causing the counter to<br>jump forward by one<br>count. Phase retard DIV_INT 2<br>forces the clock CSR_PH_ADV<br>enable low when it<br>Clock enable<br>would be high, holding<br>the counter back by Count 0 1 2 3 4 5 6<br>one count.<br>DIV_INT 2<br>CSR_PH_RET<br>Clock enable<br>Count 0 1 2 3 4<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The counter can not count faster than once per cycle, so PH_ADV requires DIV_INT > 1 or DIV_FRAC > 0. Likewise, the counter will not start to count backward if PH_RET is asserted when the clock enable is permanently low.

To advance or retard the phase by one count, software writes 1 to PH_ADV or PH_RET. Once an enable pulse has been inserted or deleted, the PH_ADV or PH_RET register bit will return to 0, and software can poll the CSR until this happens. PH_ADV will always insert a pulse into the next available gap, and PH_RET will always delete the next available pulse.

## **4.5.3. List of Registers**

The PWM registers start at a base address of 0x40050000 (defined as PWM_BASE in SDK).

_Table 516. List of PWM registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|CH0_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x04|CH0_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x08|CH0_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x0c|CH0_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x10|CH0_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x14|CH1_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x18|CH1_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x1c|CH1_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x20|CH1_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x24|CH1_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x28|CH2_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x2c|CH2_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|



**529**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x30|CH2_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x34|CH2_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x38|CH2_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x3c|CH3_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x40|CH3_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x44|CH3_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x48|CH3_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x4c|CH3_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x50|CH4_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x54|CH4_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x58|CH4_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x5c|CH4_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x60|CH4_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x64|CH5_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x68|CH5_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x6c|CH5_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x70|CH5_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x74|CH5_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x78|CH6_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x7c|CH6_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x80|CH6_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x84|CH6_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x88|CH6_TOP|Counter wrap value|
|0x8c|CH7_CSR|Control and status register|
|0x90|CH7_DIV|INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number.<br>Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number.<br>Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.|
|0x94|CH7_CTR|Direct access to the PWM counter|
|0x98|CH7_CC|Counter compare values|
|0x9c|CH7_TOP|Counter wrap value|



**530**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0xa0|EN|This register aliases the CSR_EN bits for all channels.<br>Writing to this register allows multiple channels to be enabled<br>or disabled simultaneously, so they can run in perfect sync.<br>For each channel, there is only one physical EN register bit,<br>which can be accessed through here or CHx_CSR.|
|0xa4|INTR|Raw Interrupts|
|0xa8|INTE|Interrupt Enable|
|0xac|INTF|Interrupt Force|
|0xb0|INTS|Interrupt status after masking & forcing|



## **PWM: CH0_CSR, CH1_CSR, …, CH6_CSR, CH7_CSR Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x00, 0x14, …, 0x78, 0x8c

## **Description**

Control and status register

|_Table 517. CH0_CSR,_<br>_CH1_CSR, …,_<br>_CH6_CSR, CH7_CSR_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7|**PH_ADV**: Advance the phase of the counter by 1 count, while it is running.<br>Self-clearing. Write a 1, and poll until low. Counter must be running<br>at less than full speed (div_int + div_frac / 16 > 1)|SC|0x0|
||6|**PH_RET**: Retard the phase of the counter by 1 count, while it is running.<br>Self-clearing. Write a 1, and poll until low. Counter must be running.|SC|0x0|
||5:4|**DIVMODE**|RW|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→DIV: Free-running counting at rate dictated by fractional divider|||
|||0x1→LEVEL: Fractional divider operation is gated by the PWM B pin.|||
|||0x2→RISE: Counter advances with each rising edge of the PWM B pin.|||
|||0x3→FALL: Counter advances with each falling edge of the PWM B pin.|||
||3|**B_INV**: Invert output B|RW|0x0|
||2|**A_INV**: Invert output A|RW|0x0|
||1|**PH_CORRECT**: 1: Enable phase-correct modulation. 0: Trailing-edge|RW|0x0|
||0|**EN**: Enable the PWM channel.|RW|0x0|



## **PWM: CH0_DIV, CH1_DIV, …, CH6_DIV, CH7_DIV Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x04, 0x18, …, 0x7c, 0x90

## **Description**

INT and FRAC form a fixed-point fractional number. Counting rate is system clock frequency divided by this number. Fractional division uses simple 1st-order sigma-delta.

**531**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 518. CH0_DIV,_<br>_CH1_DIV, …, CH6_DIV,_<br>_CH7_DIV Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:12|Reserved.|-|-|
||11:4|**INT**|RW|0x01|
||3:0|**FRAC**|RW|0x0|



## **PWM: CH0_CTR, CH1_CTR, …, CH6_CTR, CH7_CTR Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x08, 0x1c, …, 0x80, 0x94

|_Table 519. CH0_CTR,_<br>_CH1_CTR, …,_<br>_CH6_CTR, CH7_CTR_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Direct access to the PWM counter|RW|0x0000|



## **PWM: CH0_CC, CH1_CC, …, CH6_CC, CH7_CC Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x0c, 0x20, …, 0x84, 0x98

## **Description**

Counter compare values

|_Table 520. CH0_CC,_<br>_CH1_CC, …, CH6_CC,_<br>_CH7_CC Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|**B**|RW|0x0000|
||15:0|**A**|RW|0x0000|



## **PWM: CH0_TOP, CH1_TOP, …, CH6_TOP, CH7_TOP Registers**

**Offsets** : 0x10, 0x24, …, 0x88, 0x9c

|_Table 521. CH0_TOP,_<br>_CH1_TOP, …,_<br>_CH6_TOP, CH7_TOP_<br>_Registers_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
||15:0|Counter wrap value|RW|0xffff|



## **PWM: EN Register**

**Offset** : 0xa0

## **Description**

This register aliases the CSR_EN bits for all channels. Writing to this register allows multiple channels to be enabled or disabled simultaneously, so they can run in perfect sync. For each channel, there is only one physical EN register bit, which can be accessed through here or CHx_CSR.

|_Table 522. EN Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7|**CH7**|RW|0x0|
||6|**CH6**|RW|0x0|
||5|**CH5**|RW|0x0|
||4|**CH4**|RW|0x0|
||3|**CH3**|RW|0x0|



**532**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|**CH2**|RW|0x0|
|1|**CH1**|RW|0x0|
|0|**CH0**|RW|0x0|



## **PWM: INTR Register**

**Offset** : 0xa4

## **Description**

Raw Interrupts

_Table 523. INTR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7|**CH7**|WC|0x0|
|6|**CH6**|WC|0x0|
|5|**CH5**|WC|0x0|
|4|**CH4**|WC|0x0|
|3|**CH3**|WC|0x0|
|2|**CH2**|WC|0x0|
|1|**CH1**|WC|0x0|
|0|**CH0**|WC|0x0|



## **PWM: INTE Register**

**Offset** : 0xa8

## **Description**

Interrupt Enable

_Table 524. INTE Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7|**CH7**|RW|0x0|
|6|**CH6**|RW|0x0|
|5|**CH5**|RW|0x0|
|4|**CH4**|RW|0x0|
|3|**CH3**|RW|0x0|
|2|**CH2**|RW|0x0|
|1|**CH1**|RW|0x0|
|0|**CH0**|RW|0x0|



## **PWM: INTF Register**

**Offset** : 0xac

**533**

4.5. PWM

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Interrupt Force

_Table 525. INTF Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7|**CH7**|RW|0x0|
|6|**CH6**|RW|0x0|
|5|**CH5**|RW|0x0|
|4|**CH4**|RW|0x0|
|3|**CH3**|RW|0x0|
|2|**CH2**|RW|0x0|
|1|**CH1**|RW|0x0|
|0|**CH0**|RW|0x0|



## **PWM: INTS Register**

## **Offset** : 0xb0

## **Description**

Interrupt status after masking & forcing

_Table 526. INTS Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7|**CH7**|RO|0x0|
|6|**CH6**|RO|0x0|
|5|**CH5**|RO|0x0|
|4|**CH4**|RO|0x0|
|3|**CH3**|RO|0x0|
|2|**CH2**|RO|0x0|
|1|**CH1**|RO|0x0|
|0|**CH0**|RO|0x0|
