## **4.10. SSI**

## **Synopsys Documentation**

Synopsys Proprietary. Used with permission.

RP2040 has a Synchronous Serial Interface (SSI) controller which appears on the QSPI pins and is used to communicate with external Flash devices. The SSI forms part of the XIP block.

The SSI controller is based on a configuration of the Synopsys DW_apb_ssi IP (v4.01a).

4.10. SSI

**567**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.10.1. Overview**

In order for the DW_apb_ssi to connect to a serial-master or serial-slave peripheral device, the peripheral must have a least one of the following interfaces:

## **Motorola Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI)**

A four-wire, full-duplex serial protocol from Motorola. There are four possible combinations for the serial clock phase and polarity. The clock phase (SCPH) determines whether the serial transfer begins with the falling edge of the slave select signal or the first edge of the serial clock. The slave select line is held high when the DW_apb_ssi is idle or disabled.

## **Texas Instruments Serial Protocol (SSP)**

A four-wire, full-duplex serial protocol. The slave select line used for SPI and Microwire protocols doubles as the frame indicator for the SSP protocol.

## **National Semiconductor Microwire**

A half-duplex serial protocol, which uses a control word transmitted from the serial master to the target serial slave.

You can program the FRF (frame format) bit field in the Control Register 0 (CTRLR0) to select which protocol is used.

The serial protocols supported by the DW_apb_ssi allow for serial slaves to be selected or addressed using either hardware or software. When implemented in hardware, serial slaves are selected under the control of dedicated hardware select lines. The number of select lines generated from the serial master is equal to the number of serial slaves present on the bus. The serial-master device asserts the select line of the target serial slave before data transfer begins. This architecture is illustrated in Figure 118.

When implemented in software, the input select line for all serial slave devices should originate from a single slave select output on the serial master. In this mode it is assumed that the serial master has only a single slave select output. If there are multiple serial masters in the system, the slave select output from all masters can be logically ANDed to generate a single slave select input for all serial slave devices. The main program in the software domain controls selection of the target slave device; this architecture is illustrated in Figure 118. Software would use the SSIENR register in all slaves in order to control which slave is to respond to the serial transfer request from the master device.

The DW_apb_ssi does not enforce hardware or software control for serial-slave device selection. You can configure the DW_apb_ssi for either implementation, illustrated in Figure 118.

_Figure 118. Hardware/Software Slave Selection._

**==> picture [297 x 161] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Master Slave Master Slave<br>Data Bus Data Bus<br>ss_0 ss ss ss<br>ss_x<br>Slave Slave<br>ss ss<br>A B<br>ss = slave select line<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.2. Features**

The DW_apb_ssi is a configurable and programmable component that is a full-duplex master serial interface. The host processor accesses data, control, and status information on the DW_apb_ssi through the APB interface. The DW_apb_ssi also interfaces with the DMA Controller for bulk data transfer.

The DW_apb_ssi is configured as a serial master. The DW_apb_ssi can connect to any serial-slave peripheral device using one of the following interfaces:

4.10. SSI

**568**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Motorola Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI)]

- [Texas Instruments Serial Protocol (SSP)]

- [National Semiconductor Microwire]

On RP2040, the DW_apb_ssi is a component of the flash execute-in-place subsystem (see Section 2.6.3), and provides communication with an external SPI, dual-SPI or quad-SPI flash device.

## **4.10.2.1. IO connections**

The SSI controller connects to the following pins:

- [QSPI_SCLK][ Connected to output clock ] _[sclk_out]_

- [QSPI_SS_N][ Connected to chip select ] _[ss_o_n]_

- [QSPI_SD[3:0]][ Connected to data bus ] _[txd]_[ and ] _[rxd]_

Some pins on the IP are tied off as not used:

- _[ss_in_n]_[ is tied high]

Clock connections are as follows:

- _[pclk]_[ and ] _[sclk]_[ are driven from ][clk_sys]

## **4.10.3. IP Modifications**

The following modifications were made to the Synopsys DW_apb_ssi hardware:

1. XIP accesses are byte-swapped, such that the least-addressed byte is in the least-significant position

2. When SPI_CTRLR0_INST_L is 0, the XIP instruction field is appended to the end of the address for XIP accesses, rather than prepended to the beginning

3. The reset value of DMARDLR is increased from 0 to 4. The SSI to DMA handshaking on RP2040 requests only single transfers or bursts of four, depending on whether the RX FIFO level has reached DMARDLR, so DMARDLR should not be changed from this value.

The first of these changes allows mixed-size accesses by a little-endian busmaster, such as the RP2040 DMA, or the Cortex-M0+ configuration used on RP2040. Note that this only applies to XIP accesses (RP2040 system addresses in the range 0x10000000 to 0x13ffffff), not to direct access to the DW_apb_ssi FIFOs. When accessing the SSI directly, it may be necessary for software to swap bytes manually, or to use the RP2040 DMA’s byte swap feature.

The second supports issuing of continuation bits following the XIP address, so that command-prefix-free XIP modes can be supported (e.g. EBh Quad I/O Fast Read on Winbond devices), for greater performance. For example, the following configuration would be used to issue a standard 03h serial read command for each access to the XIP address window:

- [SPI_CTRLR0_INST_L = 8 bits]

- [SPI_CTRLR0_ADDR_L = 24 bits]

- [SPI_CTRLR0_XIP_CMD = ][0x03]

This will first issue eight command bits (0x03), then issue 24 address bits, then clock in the data bits. The configuration used for EBh quad read, after the flash has entered the XIP state, would be:

- [SPI_CTRLR0_INST_L = 0]

- [SPI_CTRLR0_ADDR_L = 32 bits]

- [SPI_CTRLR0_XIP_CMD = ][0xa0][ (continuation code on W25Qx devices)]

For each XIP access, the DW_apb_ssi will issue 32 "address" bits, consisting of the 24 LSBs of the RP2040 system bus

4.10. SSI

**569**

RP2040 Datasheet

address, followed by the 8-bit continuation code 0xa0. No command prefix is issued.

## **4.10.3.1. Example of Target Slave Selection Using Software**

The following example is pseudo code that illustrates how to use software to select the target slave.

- 1 int main() {

- 2    disable_all_serial_devices(); ①

- 3    initialize_mst(ssi_mst_1); ②

- 4    initialize_slv(ssi_slv_1); ③

- 5    start_serial_xfer(ssi_mst_1); ④ 6 }

- ① This function sets the ② This function initializes the ③ This function initializes the ④ This function begins the SSI_EN bit to logic ‘0’ in the master device for the target slave device (slave 1 serial transfer by writing SSIENR register of each serial transfer; in this example) for the transmit data into the device on the serial bus. serial transfer; master’s TX FIFO. User 1. Write CTRLR0 to can poll the busy status

- match the required 1. Write CTRLR0 to with a function or use an

- transfer match the required ISR to determine when the

- transfer

- 2. If transfer is receive serial transfer has only write number of 2. Write TXFTLR and completed. frames into CTRLR1 RXFTLR to set FIFO threshold levels

- 3. Write BAUDR to set the transfer baud rate. 3. Write IMR register to set interrupt masks

- 4. Write TXFTLR and RXFTLR to set FIFO 4. Write SSIENR register threshold levels bit[0] to logic '1' to enable the slave.

- 5. Write IMR register to set interrupt masks 5. If the slave is to transmit data, write

- 6. Write SER register data into TX FIFO Now

- bit[0] to logic '1' the slave is enabled

- 7. Write SSIENR register and awaiting an active bit[0] to logic '1' to level on its ss_in_n enable the master. input port. Note all other serial slaves are disabled (SSI_EN=0) and therefore will not respond to an active level on their ss_in_n port.

## **4.10.4. Clock Ratios**

The maximum frequency of the bit-rate clock (sclk_out) is one-half the frequency of ssi_clk. This allows the shift control logic to capture data on one clock edge of sclk_out and propagate data on the opposite edge.

Figure 119 illustrates the maximum ratio between sclk_out and ssi_clk.

4.10. SSI

**570**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 119. Maximum sclk_out/ssi_clk Ratio._

**==> picture [297 x 72] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
capture drive1 capture1 drive2 capture2 drive3 capture3<br>ssi_clk<br>sclk_out<br>txd/rxd MSB<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The sclk_out line toggles only when an active transfer is in progress. At all other times it is held in an inactive state, as defined by the serial protocol under which it operates.

The frequency of sclk_out can be derived from the following equation:

**==> picture [78 x 21] intentionally omitted <==**

SCKDV is a bit field in the programmable register BAUDR, holding any even value in the range 0 to 65,534. If SCKDV is 0, then sclk_out is disabled.

## **4.10.4.1. Frequency Ratio Summary**

A summary of the frequency ratio restrictions between the bit-rate clock (sclk_out) and the DW_apb_ssi peripheral clock (ssi_clk) are as follows:

-

**==> picture [138 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

## **4.10.5. Transmit and Receive FIFO Buffers**

The FIFO buffers used by the DW_apb_ssi are internal D-type flip-flops that are 16 entries deep. The width of both transmit and receive FIFO buffers is fixed at 32 bits, due to the serial specifications, which state that a serial transfer (data frame) can be 4 to 16/32 bits in length. Data frames that are less than 32 bits must be right-justified when written into the transmit FIFO buffer. The shift control logic automatically right-justifies receive data in the receive FIFO buffer.

Each data entry in the FIFO buffers contains a single data frame. It is impossible to store multiple data frames in a single FIFO location; for example, you may not store two 8-bit data frames in a single FIFO location. If an 8-bit data frame is required, the upper bits of the FIFO entry are ignored or unused when the serial shifter transmits the data.

##  **NOTE**

The transmit and receive FIFO buffers are cleared when the DW_apb_ssi is disabled (SSI_EN = 0) or when it is reset (presetn).

The transmit FIFO is loaded by APB write commands to the DW_apb_ssi data register (DR). Data are popped (removed) from the transmit FIFO by the shift control logic into the transmit shift register. The transmit FIFO generates a FIFO empty interrupt request (ssi_txe_intr) when the number of entries in the FIFO is less than or equal to the FIFO threshold value. The threshold value, set through the programmable register TXFTLR, determines the level of FIFO entries at which an interrupt is generated. The threshold value allows you to provide early indication to the processor that the transmit FIFO is nearly empty. A transmit FIFO overflow interrupt (ssi_txo_intr) is generated if you attempt to write data into an already full transmit FIFO.

Data are popped from the receive FIFO by APB read commands to the DW_apb_ssi data register (DR). The receive FIFO is loaded from the receive shift register by the shift control logic. The receive FIFO generates a FIFO-full interrupt request (ssi_rxf_intr) when the number of entries in the FIFO is greater than or equal to the FIFO threshold value plus one. The threshold value, set through programmable register RXFTLR, determines the level of FIFO entries at which an interrupt is generated.

The threshold value allows you to provide early indication to the processor that the receive FIFO is nearly full. A receive FIFO overrun interrupt (ssi_rxo_intr) is generated when the receive shift logic attempts to load data into a completely full receive FIFO. However, this newly received data are lost. A receive FIFO underflow interrupt (ssi_rxu_intr) is generated if

4.10. SSI

**571**

RP2040 Datasheet

you attempt to read from an empty receive FIFO. This alerts the processor that the read data are invalid.

Table 577 provides description for different Transmit FIFO Threshold values.

|_Table 577. Transmit_<br>_FIFO Threshold (TFT)_<br>_Decode Values_|**TFT Value**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||0000_0000|ssi_txe_intr is asserted when zero data entries are present in transmit FIFO|
||0000_0001|ssi_txe_intr is asserted when one or less data entry is present in transmit FIFO|
||0000_0010|ssi_txe_intr is asserted when two or less data entries are present in transmit FIFO|
||…|…|
||0000_1101|ssi_txe_intr is asserted when 13 or less data entries are present in transmit FIFO|
||0000_1110|ssi_txe_intr is asserted when 14 or less data entries are present in transmit FIFO|
||0000_1111|ssi_txe_intr is asserted when 15 or less data entries are present in transmit FIFO|



Table 578 provides description for different Receive FIFO Threshold values.

|_Table 578. Receive_<br>_FIFO Threshold (TFT)_<br>_Decode Values_|**RFT Value**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||0000_0000|ssi_rxf_intr is asserted when one or more data entry is present in receive FIFO|
||0000_0001|ssi_rxf_intr is asserted when two or more data entries are present in receive FIFO|
||0000_0010|ssi_rxf_intr is asserted when three or more data entries are present in receive FIFO|
||…|…|
||0000_1101|ssi_rxf_intr is asserted when 14 or more data entries are present in receive FIFO|
||0000_1110|ssi_rxf_intr is asserted when 15 or more data entries are present in receive FIFO|
||0000_1111|ssi_rxf_intr is asserted when 16 data entries are present in receive FIFO|



## **4.10.6. 32-Bit Frame Size Support**

The IP is configured to set the maximum programmable value in of data frame size to 32 bits. As a result the following features exist:

- [dfs_32 (CTRLR0[20:16]) are valid, which contains the value of data frame size. The new register field holds the] values 0 to 31. The dfs (CTRLR0[3:0]) is invalid and writing to this register has no effect.

- [The receive and transmit FIFO widths are 32 bits.]

- [All 32 bits of the data register are valid.]

## **4.10.7. SSI Interrupts**

The DW_apb_ssi supports combined and individual interrupt requests, each of which can be masked. The combined interrupt request is the ORed result of all other DW_apb_ssi interrupts after masking. Only the combined interrupt request is routed to the Interrupt Controller. All DW_apb_ssi interrupts are level interrupts and are active high.

The DW_apb_ssi interrupts are described as follows:

## **Transmit FIFO Empty Interrupt (ssi_txe_intr)**

Set when the transmit FIFO is equal to or below its threshold value and requires service to prevent an under-run. The threshold value, set through a software-programmable register, determines the level of transmit FIFO entries at which an interrupt is generated. This interrupt is cleared by hardware when data are written into the transmit FIFO buffer, bringing it over the threshold level.

4.10. SSI

**572**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Transmit FIFO Overflow Interrupt (ssi_txo_intr)**

Set when an APB access attempts to write into the transmit FIFO after it has been completely filled. When set, data written from the APB is discarded. This interrupt remains set until you read the transmit FIFO overflow interrupt clear register (TXOICR).

## **Receive FIFO Full Interrupt (ssi_rxf_intr)**

Set when the receive FIFO is equal to or above its threshold value plus 1 and requires service to prevent an overflow. The threshold value, set through a software-programmable register, determines the level of receive FIFO entries at which an interrupt is generated. This interrupt is cleared by hardware when data are read from the receive FIFO buffer, bringing it below the threshold level.

## **Receive FIFO Overflow Interrupt (ssi_rxo_intr)**

Set when the receive logic attempts to place data into the receive FIFO after it has been completely filled. When set, newly received data are discarded. This interrupt remains set until you read the receive FIFO overflow interrupt clear register (RXOICR).

## **Receive FIFO Underflow Interrupt (ssi_rxu_intr)**

Set when an APB access attempts to read from the receive FIFO when it is empty. When set, 0s are read back from the receive FIFO. This interrupt remains set until you read the receive FIFO underflow interrupt clear register (RXUICR).

## **Multi-Master Contention Interrupt (ssi_mst_intr)**

Present only when the DW_apb_ssi component is configured as a serial-master device. The interrupt is set when another serial master on the serial bus selects the DW_apb_ssi master as a serial-slave device and is actively transferring data. This informs the processor of possible contention on the serial bus. This interrupt remains set until you read the multi-master interrupt clear register (MSTICR).

## **Combined Interrupt Request (ssi_intr)**

OR’ed result of all the above interrupt requests after masking. To mask this interrupt signal, you must mask all other DW_apb_ssi interrupt requests.

## **4.10.8. Transfer Modes**

When transferring data on the serial bus, the DW_apb_ssi operates in the modes discussed in this section. The transfer mode (TMOD) is set by writing to control register 0 (CTRLR0).

##  **NOTE**

The transfer mode setting does not affect the duplex of the serial transfer. TMOD is ignored for Microwire transfers, which are controlled by the MWCR register.

## **4.10.8.1. Transmit and Receive**

When TMOD = 00b, both transmit and receive logic are valid. The data transfer occurs as normal according to the selected frame format (serial protocol). Transmit data are popped from the transmit FIFO and sent through the txd line to the target device, which replies with data on the rxd line. The receive data from the target device is moved from the receive shift register into the receive FIFO at the end of each data frame.

## **4.10.8.2. Transmit Only**

When TMOD = 01b, the receive data are invalid and should not be stored in the receive FIFO. The data transfer occurs as normal, according to the selected frame format (serial protocol). Transmit data are popped from the transmit FIFO and sent through the txd line to the target device, which replies with data on the rxd line. At the end of the data frame, the receive shift register does not load its newly received data into the receive FIFO. The data in the receive shift register is

4.10. SSI

**573**

RP2040 Datasheet

overwritten by the next transfer. You should mask interrupts originating from the receive logic when this mode is entered.

## **4.10.8.3. Receive Only**

When TMOD = 10b, the transmit data are invalid. When configured as a slave, the transmit FIFO is never popped in Receive Only mode. The txd output remains at a constant logic level during the transmission. The data transfer occurs as normal according to the selected frame format (serial protocol). The receive data from the target device is moved from the receive shift register into the receive FIFO at the end of each data frame. You should mask interrupts originating from the transmit logic when this mode is entered.

## **4.10.8.4. EEPROM Read**

##  **NOTE**

This transfer mode is only valid for master configurations.

When TMOD = 11b, the transmit data is used to transmit an opcode and/or an address to the EEPROM device. Typically this takes three data frames (8-bit opcode followed by 8-bit upper address and 8-bit lower address). During the transmission of the opcode and address, no data is captured by the receive logic (as long as the DW_apb_ssi master is transmitting data on its txd line, data on the rxd line is ignored). The DW_apb_ssi master continues to transmit data until the transmit FIFO is empty. Therefore, you should ONLY have enough data frames in the transmit FIFO to supply the opcode and address to the EEPROM. If more data frames are in the transmit FIFO than are needed, then read data is lost.

When the transmit FIFO becomes empty (all control information has been sent), data on the receive line (rxd) is valid and is stored in the receive FIFO; the txd output is held at a constant logic level. The serial transfer continues until the number of data frames received by the DW_apb_ssi master matches the value of the NDF field in the CTRLR1 register + 1.

##  **NOTE**

EEPROM read mode is not supported when the DW_apb_ssi is configured to be in the SSP mode.

## **4.10.9. Operation Modes**

The DW_apb_ssi can be configured in the fundamental modes of operation discussed in this section.

## **4.10.9.1. Serial Master Mode**

This mode enables serial communication with serial-slave peripheral devices. When configured as a serial-master device, the DW_apb_ssi initiates and controls all serial transfers. Figure 120 shows an example of the DW_apb_ssi configured as a serial master with all other devices on the serial bus configured as serial slaves.

4.10. SSI

**574**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 298] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 120.<br>DW_apb_ssi DW_apb_ssi  Slave<br>Configured as Master<br>Device Master 1 Peripheral 1<br>txd DI<br>ssi_oe_n DO<br>rxd SCLK<br>sclk_out SS<br>ss_n[0]<br>Slave<br>ss_n[1]<br>Peripheral n<br>ss_in_n<br>DI<br>DO<br>Glue Logic<br>SCLK<br>SS<br>Should be driven to inactive level<br>(protocol-dependent) in single master<br>systems; may not need glue logic<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The serial bit-rate clock, generated and controlled by the DW_apb_ssi, is driven out on the sclk_out line. When the DW_apb_ssi is disabled (SSI_EN = 0), no serial transfers can occur and sclk_out is held in “inactive” state, as defined by the serial protocol under which it operates.

Multiple master configuration is not supported.

## **4.10.9.1.1. RXD Sample Delay**

When the DW_apb_ssi is configured as a master, additional logic can be included in the design in order to delay the default sample time of the rxd signal. This additional logic can help to increase the maximum achievable frequency on the serial bus.

Round trip routing delays on the sclk_out signal from the master and the rxd signal from the slave can mean that the timing of the rxd signal—as seen by the master—has moved away from the normal sampling time. Figure 121 illustrates this situation.

_Figure 121. Effects of Round-Trip Routing Delays on sclk_out Signal_

**==> picture [297 x 127] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
dly=0 dly=5<br>dly=6<br>dly=7 baud-rate=4<br>ssi_clk<br>sclk_out<br>txd_mst MSB LSB<br>rxd_mst MSB LSB<br>sclk_in<br>rxd_slv MSB LSB<br>txd_slv MSB LSB<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The Slave uses the sclk_out signal from the master as a strobe in order to drive rxd signal data onto the serial bus. Routing and sampling delays on the sclk_out signal by the slave device can mean that the rxd bit has not stabilized to the correct value before the master samples the rxd signal. Figure 121 shows an example of how a routing delay on the rxd signal can result in an incorrect rxd value at the default time when the master samples the port.

4.10. SSI

**575**

RP2040 Datasheet

Without the RXD Sample Delay logic, the user would have to increase the baud-rate for the transfer in order to ensure that the setup times on the rxd signal are within range; this results in reducing the frequency of the serial interface.

When the RXD Sample Delay logic is included, the user can dynamically program a delay value in order to move the sampling time of the rxd signal equal to a number of ssi_clk cycles from the default.

The sample delay logic has a resolution of one ssi_clk cycle. Software can “train” the serial bus by coding a loop that continually reads from the slave and increments the master’s RXD Sample Delay value until the correct data is received by the master.

## **4.10.9.1.2. Data Transfers**

Data transfers are started by the serial-master device. When the DW_apb_ssi is enabled (SSI_EN=1), at least one valid data entry is present in the transmit FIFO and a serial-slave device is selected. When actively transferring data, the busy flag (BUSY) in the status register (SR) is set. You must wait until the busy flag is cleared before attempting a new serial transfer.

##  **NOTE**

The BUSY status is not set when the data are written into the transmit FIFO. This bit gets set only when the target slave has been selected and the transfer is underway. After writing data into the transmit FIFO, the shift logic does not begin the serial transfer until a positive edge of the sclk_out signal is present. The delay in waiting for this positive edge depends on the baud rate of the serial transfer. Before polling the BUSY status, you should first poll the TFE status (waiting for 1) or wait for BAUDR * ssi_clk clock cycles.

## **4.10.9.1.3. Master SPI and SSP Serial Transfers**

When the transfer mode is “transmit and receive” or “transmit only” (TMOD = 00b or TMOD = 01b, respectively), transfers are terminated by the shift control logic when the transmit FIFO is empty. For continuous data transfers, you must ensure that the transmit FIFO buffer does not become empty before all the data have been transmitted. The transmit FIFO threshold level (TXFTLR) can be used to early interrupt (ssi_txe_intr) the processor indicating that the transmit FIFO buffer is nearly empty. When a DMA is used for APB accesses, the transmit data level (DMATDLR) can be used to early request (dma_tx_req) the DMA Controller, indicating that the transmit FIFO is nearly empty. The FIFO can then be refilled with data to continue the serial transfer. The user may also write a block of data (at least two FIFO entries) into the transmit FIFO before enabling a serial slave. This ensures that serial transmission does not begin until the number of data-frames that make up the continuous transfer are present in the transmit FIFO.

When the transfer mode is “receive only” (TMOD = 10b), a serial transfer is started by writing one “dummy” data word into the transmit FIFO when a serial slave is selected. The txd output from the DW_apb_ssi is held at a constant logic level for the duration of the serial transfer. The transmit FIFO is popped only once at the beginning and may remain empty for the duration of the serial transfer. The end of the serial transfer is controlled by the “number of data frames” (NDF) field in control register 1 (CTRLR1).

If, for example, you want to receive 24 data frames from a serial-slave peripheral, you should program the NDF field with the value 23; the receive logic terminates the serial transfer when the number of frames received is equal to the NDF value + 1. This transfer mode increases the bandwidth of the APB bus as the transmit FIFO never needs to be serviced during the transfer. The receive FIFO buffer should be read each time the receive FIFO generates a FIFO full interrupt request to prevent an overflow.

When the transfer mode is “eeprom_read” (TMOD = 11b), a serial transfer is started by writing the opcode and/or address into the transmit FIFO when a serial slave (EEPROM) is selected. The opcode and address are transmitted to the EEPROM device, after which read data is received from the EEPROM device and stored in the receive FIFO. The end of the serial transfer is controlled by the NDF field in the control register 1 (CTRLR1).

4.10. SSI

**576**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

EEPROM read mode is not supported when the DW_apb_ssi is configured to be in the SSP mode.

The receive FIFO threshold level (RXFTLR) can be used to give early indication that the receive FIFO is nearly full. When a DMA is used for APB accesses, the receive data level (DMARDLR) can be used to early request (dma_rx_req) the DMA Controller, indicating that the receive FIFO is nearly full.

A typical software flow for completing an SPI or SSP serial transfer from the DW_apb_ssi serial master is outlined as follows:

1. If the DW_apb_ssi is enabled, disable it by writing 0 to the SSI Enable register (SSIENR).

2. Set up the DW_apb_ssi control registers for the transfer; these registers can be set in any order.

   - [Write Control Register 0 (CTRLR0). For SPI transfers, the serial clock polarity and serial clock phase] parameters must be set identical to target slave device.

   - [If the transfer mode is receive only, write CTRLR1 (Control Register 1) with the number of frames in the] transfer minus 1; for example, if you want to receive four data frames, if you want to receive four data frames, write '3' into CTRLR1.

   - [Write the Baud Rate Select Register (BAUDR) to set the baud rate for the transfer.]

   - [Write the Transmit and Receive FIFO Threshold Level registers (TXFTLR and RXFTLR, respectively) to set FIFO] threshold levels.

   - [Write the IMR register to set up interrupt masks.]

   - [The Slave Enable Register (SER) register can be written here to enable the target slave for selection. If a slave] is enabled here, the transfer begins as soon as one valid data entry is present in the transmit FIFO. If no slaves are enabled prior to writing to the Data Register (DR), the transfer does not begin until a slave is enabled.

3. Enable the DW_apb_ssi by writing 1 to the SSIENR register.

4. Write data for transmission to the target slave into the transmit FIFO (write DR). If no slaves were enabled in the SER register at this point, enable it now to begin the transfer.

5. Poll the BUSY status to wait for completion of the transfer. The BUSY status cannot be polled immediately.

6. If a transmit FIFO empty interrupt request is made, write the transmit FIFO (write DR). If a receive FIFO full interrupt request is made, read the receive FIFO (read DR).

7. The transfer is stopped by the shift control logic when the transmit FIFO is empty. If the transfer mode is receive only (TMOD = 10b), the transfer is stopped by the shift control logic when the specified number of frames have been received. When the transfer is done, the BUSY status is reset to 0.

8. If the transfer mode is not transmit only (TMOD != 01b), read the receive FIFO until it is empty.

9. Disable the DW_apb_ssi by writing 0 to SSIENR.

Figure 122 shows a typical software flow for starting a DW_apb_ssi master SPI/SSP serial transfer. The diagram also shows the hardware flow inside the serial-master component.

4.10. SSI

**577**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 279] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 122.<br>Software Flow<br>DW_apb_ssi Master<br>SPI/SSP Transfer Flow IDLE<br>Disable<br>DW_apb_ssi DW_apb_ssi<br>IDLE<br>Configure Master  by<br>writing CTRLR0. CTRLR1,<br>BAUDR, TXFTLR, RXFTLR,<br>IMR, SER, SPI_CTRLR0  Pop data from<br>(if Dual /Quad SPI)  Tx FIFO into shifter<br>Enable<br>DW_apb_ssi Transfer Bit<br>Write data to Tx FIFO You may fill FIFO here: Transfer begins when first data word is  No All bits in frame transferred?<br>present in the transmit<br>FIFO and slave is<br>Transfer in  enabled. Yes TMOD=01<br>progress<br>Load Rx FIFO<br>TMOD=00<br>Interrupt? Yes Interrupt Service Routine TMOD=01 TMOD=10<br>No If the transmit FIFO  No No<br>is requesting and all  Transmit  All frames<br>Yes BUSY? sent, then write data data have not been  FIFO empty? transferred<br>into transmit FIFO.<br>TMOD=01 If the receive FIFO is  Yes Yes<br>No requesting, then<br>read data from<br>Read Rx  receive FIFO.<br>FIFO END<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.9.1.4. Master Microwire Serial Transfers**

Microwire serial transfers from the DW_apb_ssi serial master are controlled by the Microwire Control Register (MWCR). The MWHS bit field enables and disables the Microwire handshaking interface. The MDD bit field controls the direction of the data frame (the control frame is always transmitted by the master and received by the slave). The MWMOD bit field defines whether the transfer is sequential or nonsequential.

All Microwire transfers are started by the DW_apb_ssi serial master when there is at least one control word in the transmit FIFO and a slave is enabled. When the DW_apb_ssi master transmits the data frame (MDD = 1), the transfer is terminated by the shift logic when the transmit FIFO is empty. When the DW_apb_ssi master receives the data frame (MDD = 1), the termination of the transfer depends on the setting of the MWMOD bit field. If the transfer is nonsequential (MWMOD = 0), it is terminated when the transmit FIFO is empty after shifting in the data frame from the slave. When the transfer is sequential (MWMOD = 1), it is terminated by the shift logic when the number of data frames received is equal to the value in the CTRLR1 register + 1.

When the handshaking interface on the DW_apb_ssi master is enabled (MWHS =1), the status of the target slave is polled after transmission. Only when the slave reports a ready status does the DW_apb_ssi master complete the transfer and clear its BUSY status. If the transfer is continuous, the next control/data frame is not sent until the slave device returns a ready status.

A typical software flow for completing a Microwire serial transfer from the DW_apb_ssi serial master is outlined as follows:

1. If the DW_apb_ssi is enabled, disable it by writing 0 to SSIENR.

2. Set up the DW_apb_ssi control registers for the transfer. These registers can be set in any order. Write CTRLR0 to set transfer parameters.

   - [If the transfer is sequential and the DW_apb_ssi master receives data, write CTRLR1 with the number of] frames in the transfer minus 1; for instance, if you want to receive four data frames, write '3' into CTRLR1.

   - [Write BAUDR to set the baud rate for the transfer.]

   - [Write TXFTLR and RXFTLR to set FIFO threshold levels.]

   - [Write the IMR register to set up interrupt masks.]

4.10. SSI

**578**

RP2040 Datasheet

You can write the SER register to enable the target slave for selection. If a slave is enabled here, the transfer begins as soon as one valid data entry is present in the transmit FIFO. If no slaves are enabled prior to writing to the DR register, the transfer does not begin until a slave is enabled.

3. Enable the DW_apb_ssi by writing 1 to the SSIENR register.

4. If the DW_apb_ssi master transmits data, write the control and data words into the transmit FIFO (write DR). If the DW_apb_ssi master receives data, write the control word(s) into the transmit FIFO.

If no slaves were enabled in the SER register at this point, enable now to begin the transfer.

5. Poll the BUSY status to wait for completion of the transfer. The BUSY status cannot be polled immediately.

6. The transfer is stopped by the shift control logic when the transmit FIFO is empty. If the transfer mode is sequential and the DW_apb_ssi master receives data, the transfer is stopped by the shift control logic when the specified number of data frames is received. When the transfer is done, the BUSY status is reset to 0.

7. If the DW_apb_ssi master receives data, read the receive FIFO until it is empty.

8. Disable the DW_apb_ssi by writing 0 to SSIENR.

Figure 123 shows a typical software flow for starting a DW_apb_ssi master Microwire serial transfer. The diagram also shows the hardware flow inside the serial-master component.

_Figure 123. DW_apb_ssi Master Microwire Transfer Flow_

**==> picture [297 x 319] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Software Flow<br>DW_apb_ssi<br>IDLE<br>IDLE<br>Disable<br>DW_apb_ssi Pop control frame<br>from Tx FIFO into<br>shifter<br>Configure Master<br>by writing CTRLR0.<br>CTRLR1, BAUDR,  Transfer Bit<br>TXFTLR, RXFTLR,<br>MWCR, IMR, SER<br>No All bits in<br>DW_apb_ssiEnable  control frame transmitted?<br>If master receives  MWCR[1]=1 Yes MWCR[1]=0<br>Write control &  data, user need only<br>data to Tx FIFO write control frames into the Tx FIFO.  Pop data frame from Tx FIFO into shifter Receive Bit<br>Transfer begins<br>when first control<br>Transfer in  word is present in  All bits in<br>progress the Transmit FIFO  Transfer Bit data frame<br>and a slave is  received?<br>enabled.<br>Interrupt? Yes Interrupt Service Routine No transmitted?data frame All bits in  Load Rx FIFOYes<br>No If the transmit FIFO<br>is requesting and all  Yes<br>Yes BUSY? sent, then write data data have not been  MWCR[0]=0<br>into transmit FIFO.<br>MWCR[1]=1 If the receive FIFO is  MWCR[0]=1<br>No requesting, then<br>read data from<br>Read Rx  receive FIFO. No Transmit  No All frames<br>FIFO FIFO empty? transferred?<br>Yes Yes<br>END<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10. Partner Connection Interfaces**

The DW_apb_ssi can connect to any serial-slave peripheral device using one of the interfaces discussed in the following sections.

4.10. SSI

**579**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.10.10.1. Motorola Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI)**

With the SPI, the clock polarity (SCPOL) configuration parameter determines whether the inactive state of the serial clock is high or low. To transmit data, both SPI peripherals must have identical serial clock phase (SCPH) and clock polarity (SCPOL) values. The data frame can be 4 to 16/32 bits (depending upon SSI_MAX_XFER_SIZE) in length.

When the configuration parameter SCPH = 0, data transmission begins on the falling edge of the slave select signal. The first data bit is captured by the master and slave peripherals on the first edge of the serial clock; therefore, valid data must be present on the txd and rxd lines prior to the first serial clock edge.

Figure 124 shows a timing diagram for a single SPI data transfer with SCPH = 0. The serial clock is shown for configuration parameters SCPOL = 0 and SCPOL = 1.

_Figure 124. SPI Serial Format (SCPH = 0)_

**==> picture [297 x 134] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out/in 0<br>sclk_out/in 1<br>MSB LSB<br>txd<br>4 -32 bits<br>MSB LSB<br>rxd<br>ss_0_n/ss_in_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The following signals are illustrated in the timing diagrams in this section:

## **sclk_out**

serial clock from DW_apb_ssi master

## **ss_0_n**

slave select signal from DW_apb_ssi master

**ss_in_n** slave select input to the DW_apb_ssi slave

## **ss_oe_n**

output enable for the DW_apb_ssi master

## **txd**

transmit data line for the DW_apb_ssi master

## **rxd**

receive data line for the DW_apb_ssi master

Continuous data transfers are supported when SCPH = 0:

- [When CTRLR0. SSTE is set to 1, the DW_apb_ssi toggles the slave select signal between frames and the serial] clock is held to its default value while the slave select signal is active; this operating mode is illustrated in Figure 125.

_Figure 125. Serial Format Continuous Transfers (SCPH = 0)_

**==> picture [297 x 105] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out/in 0<br>sclk_out/in 1<br>LSB MSB LSB MSB<br>txd/rxd<br>ss_0_n/ss_in_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


When the configuration parameter SCPH = 1, master peripherals begin transmitting data on the first serial clock edge

4.10. SSI

**580**

RP2040 Datasheet

after the slave select line is activated. The first data bit is captured on the second (trailing) serial clock edge. Data are propagated by the master peripherals on the leading edge of the serial clock. During continuous data frame transfers, the slave select line may be held active-low until the last bit of the last frame has been captured.

Figure 126 shows the timing diagram for the SPI format when the configuration parameter SCPH = 1.

_Figure 126. SPI Serial Format (SCPH = 1)_

**==> picture [297 x 133] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out/in 0<br>sclk_out/in 1<br>MSB LSB<br>txd<br>4 -32 bits<br>MSB LSB<br>rxd<br>ss_0_n/ss_in_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Continuous data frames are transferred in the same way as single frames, with the MSB of the next frame following directly after the LSB of the current frame. The slave select signal is held active for the duration of the transfer.

Figure 127 shows the timing diagram for continuous SPI transfers when the configuration parameter SCPH = 1.

_Figure 127. SPI Serial Format Continuous Transfer (SCPH = 1)_

**==> picture [297 x 116] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out/in 0<br>sclk_out/in 1<br>MSB LSB MSB LSB<br>txd<br>MSB LSB MSB LSB<br>rxd<br>ss_0_n/ss_in_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


There are four possible transfer modes on the DW_apb_ssi for performing SPI serial transactions. For transmit and receive transfers (transfer mode field (9:8) of the Control Register 0 = 00b), data transmitted from the DW_apb_ssi to the external serial device is written into the transmit FIFO. Data received from the external serial device into the DW_apb_ssi is pushed into the receive FIFO.

Figure 128 shows the FIFO levels prior to the beginning of a serial transfer and the FIFO levels on completion of the transfer. In this example, two data words are transmitted from the DW_apb_ssi to the external serial device in a continuous transfer. The external serial device also responds with two data words for the DW_apb_ssi.

_Figure 128. FIFO Status for Transmit & Receive SPI and SSP Transfers_

**==> picture [297 x 160] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 2 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 1 Tx Data(1) Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Tx Data(0) Location 1 Rx_Data(1)<br>Location 0 Rx_Data(0)<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty Read DR<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


For transmit only transfers (transfer mode field (9:8) of the Control Register 0 = 01b), data transmitted from the DW_apb_ssi to the external serial device is written into the transmit FIFO. As the data received from the external serial device is deemed invalid, it is not stored in the DW_apb_ssi receive FIFO.

4.10. SSI

**581**

RP2040 Datasheet

Figure 129 shows the FIFO levels prior to the beginning of a serial transfer and the FIFO levels on completion of the transfer. In this example, two data words are transmitted from the DW_apb_ssi to the external serial device in a continuous transfer.

_Figure 129. FIFO Status for Transmit Only SPI and SSP Transfers_

**==> picture [297 x 160] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 2 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 1 Tx Data(1) Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Tx Data(0) Location 1 NULL<br>Location 0 NULL<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty Read DR<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


For receive only transfers (transfer mode field (9:8) of the Control Register 0 = 10b), data transmitted from the DW_apb_ssi to the external serial device is invalid, so a single dummy word is written into the transmit FIFO to begin the serial transfer. The txd output from the DW_apb_ssi is held at a constant logic level for the duration of the serial transfer. Data received from the external serial device into the DW_apb_ssi is pushed into the receive FIFO.

Figure 130 shows the FIFO levels prior to the beginning of a serial transfer and the FIFO levels on completion of the transfer. In this example, two data words are received by the DW_apb_ssi from the external serial device in a continuous transfer.

_Figure 130. FIFO Status for Receive Only SPI and SSP Transfers_

**==> picture [297 x 160] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 2 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 1 NULL Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Dummy Word Location 1 Rx_Data(1)<br>Location 0 Rx_Data(0)<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty Read DR<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


For eeprom_read transfers (transfer mode field [9:8] of the Control Register 0 = 11b), opcode and/or EEPROM address are written into the transmit FIFO. During transmission of these control frames, received data is not captured by the DW_apb_ssi master. After the control frames have been transmitted, receive data from the EEPROM is stored in the receive FIFO.

Figure 131 shows the FIFO levels prior to the beginning of a serial transfer and the FIFO levels on completion of the transfer. In this example, one opcode and an upper and lower address are transmitted to the EEPROM, and eight data frames are read from the EEPROM and stored in the receive FIFO of the DW_apb_ssi master.

4.10. SSI

**582**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 131. FIFO Status for EEPROM Read Transfer Mode_

**==> picture [297 x 184] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 3 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 2 Address[7:0] Location 7 Rx_Data(7)<br>Location 1 Address[15:8] Location 6 Rx_Data(6)<br>Location 0 Opcode<br>Location 1 Rx_Data(1)<br>Location 0 Rx_Data(0)<br>Rx FIFO Empty<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd<br>Read DR<br>Transfer<br>FIFO Status on<br>Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.2. Texas Instruments Synchronous Serial Protocol (SSP)**

Data transfers begin by asserting the frame indicator line (ss_0_n/ss_in_n) for one serial clock period. Data to be transmitted are driven onto the txd line one serial clock cycle later; similarly data from the slave are driven onto the rxd line. Data are propagated on the rising edge of the serial clock (sclk_out/sclk_in) and captured on the falling edge. The length of the data frame ranges from four to 32 bits.

Figure 132 shows the timing diagram for a single SSP serial transfer.

_Figure 132. SSP Serial Format_

**==> picture [297 x 103] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out/in<br>MSB LSB<br>txd/rxd<br>ss_0_n/ss_in_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Continuous data frames are transferred in the same way as single data frames. The frame indicator is asserted for one clock period during the same cycle as the LSB from the current transfer, indicating that another data frame follows.

Figure 133 shows the timing for a continuous SSP transfer.

_Figure 133. SSP Serial Format Continuous Transfer_

**==> picture [297 x 102] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out/in<br>MSB LSB MSB<br>txd/rxd<br>ss_0_n/ss_in_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.3. National Semiconductor Microwire**

Data transmission begins with the falling edge of the slave-select signal (ss_0_n). One-half serial clock (sclk_out) period later, the first bit of the control is sent out on the txd line. The length of the control word can be in the range 1 to 16 bits and is set by writing bit field CFS (bits 15:12) in CTRLR0. The remainder of the control word is transmitted (propagated on the falling edge of sclk_out) by the DW_apb_ssi serial master. During this transmission, no data are present (high impedance) on the serial master’s rxd line.

4.10. SSI

**583**

RP2040 Datasheet

The direction of the data word is controlled by the MDD bit field (bit 1) in the Microwire Control Register (MWCR). When MDD=0, this indicates that the DW_apb_ssi serial master receives data from the external serial slave. One clock cycle after the LSB of the control word is transmitted, the slave peripheral responds with a dummy 0 bit, followed by the data frame, which can be four to 32 bits in length. Data are propagated on the falling edge of the serial clock and captured on the rising edge.

The slave-select signal is held active-low during the transfer and is de-asserted one-half clock cycle later, after the data are transferred. Figure 134 shows the timing diagram for a single DW_apb_ssi serial master read from an external serial slave.

_Figure 134. Single DW_apb_ssi Master Microwire Serial Transfer (MDD=0)_

**==> picture [297 x 116] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>Control word<br>txd MSB LSB<br>4 -32 bits<br>rxd 0 MSB LSB<br>ss_0_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 135 shows how the data and control frames are structured in the transmit FIFO prior to the transfer; the value programmed into the MWCR register is also shown.

_Figure 135. FIFO Status for Single Microwire Transfer (receiving data frame)_

**==> picture [297 x 184] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
MWHS MDD MWMOD<br>MWCR 0 0 0<br>rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 3 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 2 NULL Location 3 NULL<br>Location 1 NULL Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Ctrl Word(0) Location 1 NULL<br>Location 0 Rx_Data(0)<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty Read DR<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Continuous transfers for the Microwire protocol can be sequential or nonsequential, and are controlled by the MWMOD bit field (bit 0) in the MWCR register.

Nonsequential continuous transfers occur as illustrated in Figure 136, with the control word for the next transfer following immediately after the LSB of the current data word.

_Figure 136. Continuous Nonsequential Microwire Transfer (receiving data frame)_

**==> picture [297 x 92] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>Control word 0 Control word 1<br>txd MSB LSB MSB LSB<br>Data Word 0 Data Word 1<br>rxd 0 MSB LSB 0 MSB LSB<br>ss_0_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The only modification needed to perform a continuous nonsequential transfer is to write more control words into the transmit FIFO buffer; this is illustrated in Figure 137. In this example, two data words are read from the external serialslave device.

4.10. SSI

**584**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 184] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 137. FIFO<br>Status for MWHS MDD MWMOD<br>MWCR 0 0 0<br>Nonsequential rxd<br>Microwire Transfer<br>Write DR<br>(receiving data frame) Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 3 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 2 NULL Location 3 NULL<br>Location 1 Ctrl Word(1) Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Ctrl Word(0) Location 1 Rx_Data(1)<br>Location 0 Rx_Data(0)<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty Read DR<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


During sequential continuous transfers, only one control word is transmitted from the DW_apb_ssi master. The transfer is started in the same manner as with nonsequential read operations, but the cycle is continued to read further data. The slave device automatically increments its address pointer to the next location and continues to provide data from that location. Any number of locations can be read in this manner; the DW_apb_ssi master terminates the transfer when the number of words received is equal to the value in the CTRLR1 register plus one.

The timing diagram in Figure 138 and example in Figure 139 show a continuous sequential read of two data frames from the external slave device.

**==> picture [356 x 116] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 138.<br>Continuous Sequential<br>sclk_out<br>Microwire Transfer<br>(receiving data frame) Control word<br>txd MSB LSB<br>Data Word 0 Data Word 1<br>rxd 0 MSB LSB MSB LSB<br>ss_0_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


_Figure 139. FIFO Status for Sequential Microwire Transfer (receiving data frame)_

|Lo<br>Lo<br>Lo<br>Lo<br>Lo<br>M|rxd<br>0<br>MWHS<br>WCR<br>0<br>MDD<br>1<br>MWMOD|rxd<br>0<br>MWHS<br>WCR<br>0<br>MDD<br>1<br>MWMOD|rxd<br>0<br>MWHS<br>WCR<br>0<br>MDD<br>1<br>MWMOD|rxd<br>0<br>MWHS<br>WCR<br>0<br>MDD<br>1<br>MWMOD|FIFO Status on<br>Completion of Transfer<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Location n<br>Location 3<br>Location 2<br>Location 1<br>Location 0<br>NULL<br>NULL<br>Rx_Data(1)<br>Rx_Data(0)<br>NULL<br>Tx FIFO Empty<br>Read DR|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Tx FIFO Buffer<br>FIFO Status Prior to<br>Transfer<br>cation n<br>cation 3<br>cation 2<br>cation 1<br>cation 0<br>Write DR<br>NULL<br>NULL<br>NULL<br>NULL<br>Ctrl Word(0)<br>Rx FIFO Empty|SHIFT LOGIC<br>txd|||FIFO Status on<br>Completion of Transfer<br>Rx FIFO Bu<br>Location n<br>Location 3<br>Location 2<br>Location 1<br>Location 0<br>NULL<br>NULL<br>Rx_Data(1)<br>Rx_Data(0)<br>NULL<br>Tx FIFO Empty<br>Read DR|
||||SHIFT LOGIC|||
|||||||
|||||||



When MDD = 1, this indicates that the DW_apb_ssi serial master transmits data to the external serial slave. Immediately after the LSB of the control word is transmitted, the DW_apb_ssi master begins transmitting the data frame to the slave peripheral.

Figure 140 shows the timing diagram for a single DW_apb_ssi serial master write to an external serial slave.

4.10. SSI

**585**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 140. Single Microwire Transfer (transmitting data frame)_

**==> picture [297 x 101] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>Control word Data word 0<br>txd MSB LSB MSB LSB<br>rxd<br>ss_0_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


##  **NOTE**

The DW_apb_ssi does not support continuous sequential Microwire writes, where MDD = 1 and MWMOD = 1.

Figure 141 shows how the data and control frames are structured in the transmit FIFO prior to the transfer, also shown is the value programmed into the MWCR register.

_Figure 141. FIFO Status for Single Microwire Transfer (transmitting data frame)_

**==> picture [297 x 184] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
MWHS MDD MWMOD<br>MWCR 0 1 0<br>rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 3 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 2 NULL Location 3 NULL<br>Location 1 Tx Data(0) Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Ctrl Word(0) Location 1 NULL<br>Location 0 NULL<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Continuous transfers occur as shown in Figure 142, with the control word for the next transfer following immediately after the LSB of the current data word.

_Figure 142. Continuous Microwire Transfer (transmitting data frame)_

**==> picture [297 x 90] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>Control word 0 Data word 0 Control word 1 Data word 1<br>txd MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB<br>rxd<br>ss_0_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The only modification you need to make to perform a continuous transfer is to write more control and data words into the transmit FIFO buffer, shown in Figure 143. This example shows two data words are written to the external serial slave device.

4.10. SSI

**586**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 184] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 143. FIFO<br>Status for Continuous MWHS MDD MWMOD<br>Microwire Transfer MWCR 0 1 0 rxd<br>(transmitting data Write DR<br>frame) Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 3 Data Word(1) SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 2 Ctrl Word(1) Location 3 NULL<br>Location 1 Tx Data(0) Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Ctrl Word(0) Location 1 NULL<br>Location 0 NULL<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The Microwire handshaking interface can also be enabled for DW_apb_ssi master write operations to external serialslave devices. To enable the handshaking interface, you must write 1 into the MHS bit field (bit 2) on the MWCR register. When MHS is set to 1, the DW_apb_ssi serial master checks for a ready status from the slave device before completing the transfer, or transmitting the next control word for continuous transfers.

Figure 144 shows an example of a continuous Microwire transfer with the handshaking interface enabled.

**==> picture [356 x 67] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Figure 144.|
|Continuous Microwire|sclk_out|
|Transfer with|txd|MSBControl word 0LSB|MSBData word 0LSB|MSBControl word 1LSB|MSBData word 1LSB|Start Bit|
|Handshaking(transmitting data|rxd|Busy|Ready|Busy|Ready|
|frame)|ss_0_n|
|ssi_oe_n|

**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


After the first data word has been transmitted to the serial-slave device, the DW_apb_ssi master polls the rxd input waiting for a ready status from the slave device. Upon reception of the ready status, the DW_apb_ssi master begins transmission of the next control word. After transmission of the last data frame has completed, the DW_apb_ssi master transmits a start bit to clear the ready status of the slave device before completing the transfer. The FIFO status for this transfer is the same as in Figure 143, except that the MWHS bit field is set (1).

To transmit a control word (not followed by data) to a serial-slave device from the DW_apb_ssi master, there must be only one entry in the transmit FIFO buffer. It is impossible to transmit two control words in a continuous transfer, as the shift logic in the DW_apb_ssi treats the second control word as a data word. When the DW_apb_ssi master transmits only a control word, the MDD bit field (bit 1 of MWCR register) must be set (1).

In the example shown in Figure 145 and in the timing diagram in Figure 146, the handshaking interface is enabled. If the handshaking interface is disabled (MHS=0), the transfer is terminated by the DW_apb_ssi master one sclk_out cycle after the LSB of the control word is captured by the slave device.

_Figure 145. FIFO Status for Microwire Control Word Transfer_

**==> picture [297 x 184] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
MWHS MDD MWMOD<br>MWCR 1 1 0<br>rxd<br>Write DR<br>Tx FIFO Buffer Tx FIFO Empty<br>Location n NULL<br>Location n NULL<br>Location 3 NULL SHIFT LOGIC<br>Location 2 NULL Location 3 NULL<br>Location 1 NULL Location 2 NULL<br>Location 0 Ctrl Word(0) Location 1 NULL<br>Location 0 NULL<br>Rx FIFO Buffer<br>Rx FIFO Empty<br>FIFO Status Prior to  txd FIFO Status on<br>Transfer Completion of Transfer<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


4.10. SSI

**587**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 146. Microwire Control Word_

**==> picture [297 x 116] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>Control Word 0<br>MSB LSB Start Bit<br>txd<br>rxd Busy Ready<br>ss_0_n<br>ssi_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.4. Enhanced SPI Modes**

DW_apb_ssi supports the dual and quad modes of SPI in RP2040; octal mode is not supported. txd, rxd and ssi_oe_n signals are four bits wide.

Data is shifted out/in on more than one line, increasing the overall throughput. All four combinations of the serial clock’s polarity and phase are valid in this mode and work the same as in normal SPI mode. Dual SPI, or Quad SPI modes function similarly except for the width of txd, rxd and ssi_oe_n signals. The mode of operation (write/read) can be selected using the CTRLR0.TMOD field.

## **4.10.10.4.1. Write Operation in Enhanced SPI Modes**

Dual, or Quad, SPI write operations can be divided into three parts:

- [Instruction phase]

- [Address phase]

- [Data phase]

The following register fields are used for a write operation:

- [CTRLR0.SPI_FRF - Specifies the format in which the transmission happens for the frame.]

- [SPI_CTRLR0 (Control Register 0 register) – Specifies length of instruction, address, and data.]

- [SPI_CTRLR0.INST_L – Specifies length of an instruction (possible values for an instruction are 0, 4, 8, or 16 bits.)]

- [SPI_CTRLR0.ADDR_L – Specifies address length (See ][Table 579][ for decode values)]

- [CTRLR0.DFS or CTRLR0.DFS_32 – Specifies data length.]

An instruction takes one FIFO location. An address can take more than one FIFO locations.

Both the instruction and address must be programmed in the data register (DR). DW_apb_ssi will wait until both have been programmed to start the write operation.

The instruction, address and data can be programmed to send in dual/quad mode, which can be selected from the SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE and CTRLR0.SPI_FRF fields.

4.10. SSI

**588**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

- [If CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is selected to be "Standard SPI Format", everything is sent in Standard SPI mode and] SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field is ignored.

- [CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is only applicable if CTRLR0.FRF is programmed to ][00b][.]

Figure 147 shows a typical write operation in Dual, or Quad, SPI Mode. The value of N will be: 7 if SSI_SPI_MODE is set to 3, 3 if SSI_SPI_MODE is set to 2, and 1 if SSI_SPI_MODE is set to 1. For 1-write operation, the instruction and address are sent only once followed by data frames programmed in DR until the transmit FIFO becomes empty.

_Figure 147. Typical Write Operation Dual/Quad SPI Mode_

**==> picture [297 x 50] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>txd[N:0] INSTRUCTION ADDRESS DATA<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>ss_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


To initiate a Dual/Quad write operation, CTRLR0.SPI_FRF must be set to 01/10/11, respectively. This will set the transfer type, and for each write command, data will be transferred in the format specified in CTLR0.SPI_FRF field.

## **Case A: Instruction and address both transmitted in standard SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field must be set to 00b. Figure 148 show the timing diagram when both instruction and address are transmitted in standard SPI format. The value of N will be: 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

**==> picture [356 x 77] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 148. Instruction<br>and Address sclk_out<br>Transmitted in txd[0] INSTRUCTION ADDRESS DATA<br>Standard SPI Format txd[N-1:0] DATA<br>ss_oe_n[0]<br>ss_oe_n[N-1:0]<br>ss_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Case B: Instruction transmitted in standard and address transmitted in Enhanced SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field must be set to one. Figure 149 shows the timing diagram when an instruction is transmitted in standard format and address is transmitted in dual SPI format specified in the CTRLR0.SPI_FRF field. The value of N will be: 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

**==> picture [356 x 76] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 149. Instruction<br>Transmitted in sclk_out<br>Standard and Address txd[0] INSTRUCTION ADDRESS DATA<br>Transmitted in txd[N-1:0] ADDRESS DATA<br>Enhanced SPI Format<br>ss_oe_n[0]<br>ss_oe_n[N-1:0]<br>ss_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Case C: Instruction and Address both transmitted in Enhanced SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field must be set to 10b. Figure 150 shows the timing diagram in which instruction and address are transmitted in SPI format specified in the CTRLR0.SPI_FRF field. The value of N will be: 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

**==> picture [356 x 55] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 150. Instruction<br>and Address Both sclk_out<br>Transmitted in txd[N:0] INSTRUCTION ADDRESS DATA<br>Enhanced SPI Format ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>ss_0_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Case D: Instruction only transfer in enhanced SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field must be set to 10b. Figure 151 shows the timing diagram for such a transfer. The value of N will be: 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if

4.10. SSI

**589**

RP2040 Datasheet

## CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

_Figure 151. Instruction only transfer in enhanced SPI Format_

**==> picture [297 x 55] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>txd[N:0] INSTRUCTION<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>ss_0_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.4.2. Read Operation in Enhanced SPI Modes**

A Dual, or Quad, SPI read operation can be divided into four phases:

- [Instruction phase]

- [Address phase]

- [Wait cycles]

- [Data phase]

Wait Cycles can be programmed using SPI_CTRLR0.WAIT_CYCLES field. The value programmed into SPI_CTRLR0.WAIT_CYCLES is mapped directly to sclk_out times. For example, WAIT_CYCLES=0 indicates no Wait, WAIT_CYCLES=1, indicates one wait cycle and so on. The wait cycles are introduced for target slave to change their mode from input to output and the wait cycles can vary for different devices.

For a READ operation, DW_apb_ssi sends instruction and control data once and waits until it receives NDF (CTRLR1 register) number of data frames and then de-asserts slave select signal.

Figure 152 shows a typical read operation in dual quad SPI mode. The value of N will be: 3 if SSI_SPI_MODE is set to Quad mode, and 1 if SSI_SPI_MODE is set to Dual mode.

_Figure 152. Typical Read Operation in Enhanced SPI Mode_

**==> picture [297 x 55] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>txd[N:0] INSTRUCTION ADDRESS WAIT CYCLES<br>rxd[N:0] DATA<br>ss_oe_n[N:0]<br>ss_oe_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


To initiate a dual/quad read operation, CTRLR0.SPI_FRF must be set to 01/10/11 respectively. This will set the transfer type, now for each read command data will be transferred in the format specified in CTLR0.SPI_FRF field.

Following are the possible cases of write operation in enhanced SPI modes:

## **Case A: Instruction and address both transmitted in standard SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field should be set to 00b. Figure 153 shows the timing diagram when both instruction and address are transferred in standard SPI format. The figure also shows WAIT cycles after address, which can be programmed in the SPI_CTRLR0.WAIT_CYCLES field. The value of N will be 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

**==> picture [356 x 74] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 153. Instruction<br>and Address sclk_out<br>Transmitted in txd[0] INSTRUCTION ADDRESS WAIT CYCLES<br>Standard SPI Format txd[N-1:0]<br>rxd[N:0] DATA<br>ssi_oe_n[0]<br>ssi_oe_n[N-1:0]<br>ss_0_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Case B: Instruction transmitted in standard and address transmitted in dual SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field should be set to 01b. Figure 154 shows the timing diagram in which instruction is transmitted in standard format and address is transmitted in dual SPI format. The value of N will be 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

4.10. SSI

**590**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Figure 154. Instruction_|||||||||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Transmitted in_|sclk_out||||||||||||||||||
|_Standard and Address_|txd[0]||||INSTRUCTION|||||ADDRESS|||||||||
|_Transmitted in_|txd[N-1:0]|||||||||ADDRESS|||||||||
|_Enhanced SPI Format_|rxd[N:0]||||||||||||DATA||||||
||ssi_oe_n[0]||||||||||||||||||
||ssi_oe_n[N-1:0]||||||||||||||||||
||ss_0_n||||||||||||||||||



## **Case C: Instruction and Address both transmitted in Dual SPI format**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.TRANS_TYPE field must be set to 10b. Figure 155 shows the timing diagram in which both instruction and address are transmitted in dual SPI format. The value of N will be: 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

|_Figure 155. Instruction_|||||||||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_and Address_|sclk_out||||||||||||||||||
|_Transmitted in_|txd[N:0]||||INSTRUCTION|||||ADDRESS|||||||||
|_Enhanced SPI Format_|rxd[N:0]||||||||||||DATA||||||
||ssi_oe_n[N:0]||||||||||||||||||
||ss_0_n||||||||||||||||||



## **Case D: No Instruction, No Address READ transfer**

For this, SPI_CTRLR0.ADDR_L and SPI_CTRLR0.INST_L must be set to 0 and SPI_CTRLR0.WAIT_CYCLES must be set to a non-zero value. Table 579 lists the ADDR_L decode value and the respective description for enhanced (Dual/Quad) SPI modes.

|_Table 579. ADDR_L_<br>_Decode in Enhanced_<br>_SPI Mode_|**ADDR_L Decode Value**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||0000|0-bit Address Width|
||0001|4-bit Address Width|
||0010|8-bit Address Width|
||0011|12-bit Address Width|
||0100|16-bit Address Width|
||0101|20-bit Address Width|
||0110|24-bit Address Width|
||0111|28-bit Address Width|
||1000|32-bit Address Width|
||1001|36-bit Address Width|
||1010|40-bit Address Width|
||1011|44-bit Address Width|
||1100|48-bit Address Width|
||1101|52-bit Address Width|
||1110|56-bit Address Width|
||1111|60-bit Address Width|



Figure 156 shows the timing diagram for such type of transfer. The value of N will be: 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b, and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b. To initiate this transfer, the software has to perform a dummy write in the data register (DR), DW_apb_ssi will wait for programmed wait cycles and then fetch the amount of data specified in NDF field.

4.10. SSI

**591**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 156. No Instruction and No Address READ Transfer_

**==> picture [297 x 66] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
sclk_out<br>txd[N:0] WAIT CYCLES<br>rxd[N:0] DATA<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>ss_0_n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.4.3. Advanced I/O Mapping for Enhanced SPI Modes**

The Input/Output mapping for enhanced SPI modes (dual, and quad) is hardcoded inside the DW_apb_ssi. The rxd[1] signal will be used to sample incoming data in standard SPI mode of operation.

For other protocols (such as SSP and Microwire), the I/O mapping remains the same. Therefore, it is easy for other protocols to connect with any device that supports Dual/Quad SPI operation because other protocols do not require a MUX logic to exist outside the design.

Figure 157 shows the I/O mapping of DW_apb_ssi in Quad mode with another SPI device that supports the Quad mode. As illustrated in Figure 157, the IO[1] pin is used as DO in standard SPI mode of operation and it is connected to rxd[1] pin, which will be sampling the input in the standard mode of operation.

_Figure 157. Advanced I/O Mapping in Quad SPI Modes_

**==> picture [297 x 224] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
txd[3]<br>IO Buffer IO[3]<br>rxd[3]<br>txd[2]<br>IO Buffer IO[2]<br>rxd[2]<br>txd[1]<br>IO Buffer IO[1]/DO<br>rxd[1]<br>txd[0]<br>IO Buffer IO[0]/DI<br>rxd[0]<br>DW_apb_ssi SPI slave Device<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.5. Dual Data-Rate (DDR) Support in SPI Operation**

In standard operations, data transfer in SPI modes occur on either the positive or negative edge of the clock. For improved throughput, the dual data-rate transfer can be used for reading or writing to the memories.

The DDR mode supports the following modes of SPI protocol:

- [SCPH=0 & SCPOL=0 (Mode 0)]

- [SCPH=1 & SCPOL=1 (Mode 3)]

DDR commands enable data to be transferred on both edges of clock. Following are the different types of DDR commands:

- [Address and data are transmitted (or received in case of data) in DDR format, while instruction is transmitted in] standard format.

- [Instruction, address, and data are all transmitted or received in DDR format.]

The DDR_EN (SPI_CTRLR0[16]) bit is used to determine if the Address and data have to be transferred in DDR mode and INST_DDR_EN (SPI_CTRLR0[17]) bit is used to determine if Instruction must be transferred in DDR format. These bits

4.10. SSI

**592**

RP2040 Datasheet

are only valid when the CTRLR0.SPI_FRF bit is set to be in Dual, or Quad mode.

Figure 158 describes a DDR write transfer where instructions are continued to be transmitted in standard format. In Figure 158, the value of N will be 7 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 11b, 3 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 10b , and 1 if CTRLR0.SPI_FRF is set to 01b.

**==> picture [356 x 91] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 158. DDR<br>Transfer with SCPH=0 sclk_out<br>and SCPOL=0 ss_oe_n<br>txd[N:0] INST A3 A2 A1 A0 D3 D2 D1 D0<br>rxd[N:0]<br>ss_oe_n[N:0]<br>INST = Instruction Phase<br>A3, A2, A1, A0 = Address Bytes<br>D3, D2, D1, D0 = Data Bytes<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 159 describes a DDR write transfer where instruction, address and data all are transferred in DDR format.

**==> picture [356 x 91] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 159. DDR<br>Transfer with sclk_out<br>Instruction, Address ss_0_n<br>and Data Transmitted txd[N:0] INST-1 INST-2 A3 A2 A1 A0 D3 D2 D1 D0<br>in DDR Format<br>rxd[N:0]<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>INST-1, INST-2 = Instruction Bytes<br>A3, A2, A1, A0 = Address Bytes<br>D3, D2, D1, D0 = Data Bytes<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


##  **NOTE**

In the DDR transfer, address and instruction cannot be programmed to a value of 0.

## **4.10.10.5.1. Transmitting Data in DDR Mode**

In DDR mode, data is transmitted on both edges so that it is difficult to sample data correctly. DW_apb_ssi uses an internal register to determine the edge on which the data should be transmitted. This will ensure that the receiver is able to get a stable data while sampling. The internal register (DDR_DRIVE_EDGE) determines the edge on which the data is transmitted. DW_apb_ssi sends data with respect to baud clock, which is an integral multiple of the internal clock (ssi_clk * BAUDR). The data needs to be transmitted within half clock cycle (BAUDR/2), therefore the maximum value for DDR_DRIVE_EDGE is equal to [(BAUDR/2)-1]. If the programmed value of DDR_DRIVE_EDGE is 0 then data is transmitted edge-aligned with respect to sclk_out (baud clock). If the programmed value of DDR_DRIVE_EDGE is one then the data is transmitted one ssi_clk before the edge of sclk_out.

##  **NOTE**

If the baud rate is programmed to be two, then the data will always be edge aligned.

Figure 160, Figure 161, and Figure 162 show examples of how data is transmitted using different values of the DDR_DRIVE_EDGE register. The green arrows in these examples represent the points where data is driven. Baud rate used in all these examples is 12. In Figure 160, transmit edge and driving edge of the data are the same. This is default behavior in DDR mode.

_Figure 160. Transmit Data With DDR_DRIVE_EDGE = 0_

**==> picture [297 x 102] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
ssi_clk<br>sclk_out<br>ss_0_n<br>txd[N:0] INST A3 A2 A1 A0 D3 D2 D1 D0<br>rxd[N:0]<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>INST = Instruction Phase<br>A3, A2, A1, A0 = Address Bytes<br>D3, D2, D1, D0 = Data Bytes<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


4.10. SSI

**593**

RP2040 Datasheet

Figure 160 shows the default behavior in which the transmit and driving edge of the data is the same.

_Figure 161. Transmit Data With DDR_DRIVE_EDGE = 1_

_Figure 162. Transmit Data With DDR_DRIVE_EDGE = 2_

**==> picture [297 x 215] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
ssi_clk<br>sclk_out<br>ss_0_n<br>txd[N:0] INST A3 A2 A1 A0 D3 D2 D1 D0<br>rxd[N:0]<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>INST = Instruction Phase<br>A3, A2, A1, A0 = Address Bytes<br>D3, D2, D1, D0 = Data Bytes<br>ssi_clk<br>sclk_out<br>ss_0_n<br>txd[N:0] INST A3 A2 A1 A0 D3 D2 D1 D0<br>rxd[N:0]<br>ssi_oe_n[N:0]<br>INST = Instruction Phase<br>A3, A2, A1, A0 = Address Bytes<br>D3, D2, D1, D0 = Data Bytes<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.10.6. XIP Mode Support in SPI Mode**

The eXecute In Place (XIP) mode enables transfer of SPI data directly through the APB interface without writing the data register of DW_apb_ssi. XIP mode is enabled in DW_apb_ssi when the XIP cache is enabled. This control signal indicates whether APB transfers are register read-write or XIP reads. When in XIP mode, DW_apb_ssi expects only read request on the APB interface. This request is translated to SPI read on the serial interface and soon after the data is received, the data is returned to the APB interface in the same transaction.

##  **NOTE**

- [Only APB reads are supported during an XIP operation]

The address length is derived from the SPI_CTRLR0.ADDR_L field, and relevant bits from paddr ([SPI_CTRLR0.ADDR_L1:0]) are transferred as address to the SPI interface. XIP address is managed by the XIP cache controller.

## **4.10.10.6.1. Read Operation in XIP Mode**

The XIP operation is supported only in enhanced SPI modes (Dual, Quad) of operation. Therefore, the CTRLR0.SPI_FRF bit should not be programmed to 0. An XIP read operation is divided into two phases:

- [Address phase]

- [Data phase]

For an XIP read operation

1. Set the SPI frame format and data frame size value in CTRLR0 register. Note that the value of the maximum data frame size is 32.

2. Set the Address length, Wait cycles, and transaction type in the SPI_CTRLR0 register. Note that the maximum address length is 32.

After these settings, a user can initiate a read transaction through the APB interface which will transferred to SPI peripheral using programmed values. Figure 163 shows the typical XIP transfer. The Value of N = 1, 3 and 7 for SPI mode Dual, and Quad modes, respectively.

4.10. SSI

**594**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 163. Typical Read Operation in XIP Mode_

**==> picture [297 x 131] intentionally omitted <==**

## **4.10.11. DMA Controller Interface**

The DW_apb_ssi has built-in DMA capability; it has a handshaking interface to a DMA Controller to request and control transfers. The APB bus is used to perform the data transfer to or from the DMA.

##  **NOTE**

When the DW_apb_ssi interfaces to the DMA controller, the DMA controller is always a flow controller; that is, it controls the block size. This must be programmed by software in the DMA controller.

The DW_apb_ssi uses two DMA channels, one for the transmit data and one for the receive data. The DW_apb_ssi has these DMA registers:

## **DMACR**

Control register to enable DMA operation.

## **DMATDLR**

Register to set the transmit the FIFO level at which a DMA request is made.

## **DMARDLR**

Register to set the receive FIFO level at which a DMA request is made.

The DW_apb_ssi uses the following handshaking signals to interface with the DMA controller.

- [dma_tx_req]

- [dma_tx_single]

- [dma_tx_ack]

- [dma_rx_req]

- [dma_tx_req]

- [dma_tx_single]

- [dma_tx_ack]

- [dma_rx_req]

To enable the DMA Controller interface on the DW_apb_ssi, you must write the DMA Control Register (DMACR). Writing a 1 into the TDMAE bit field of DMACR register enables the DW_apb_ssi transmit handshaking interface. Writing a 1 into the RDMAE bit field of the DMACR register enables the DW_apb_ssi receive handshaking interface.

Table 580 provides description for different DMA transmit data level values.

_Table 580. DMA Transmit Data Level (DMATDL) Decode Value_

|**DMATDL Value**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|0000_0000|dma_tx_req is asserted when zero data entries are present in the transmit FIFO|
|0000_0001|dma_tx_req is asserted when one or less data entry is present in the transmit FIFO|



4.10. SSI

**595**

RP2040 Datasheet

|0000_0010|dma_tx_req is asserted when two or less data entries are present in the transmit FIFO|
|---|---|
|…|…|
|0000_1101|dma_tx_req is asserted when 13 or less data entries are present in the transmit FIFO|
|0000_1110|dma_tx_req is asserted when 14 or less data entries are present in the transmit FIFO|
|0000_1111|dma_tx_req is asserted when 15 or less data entries are present in the transmit FIFO|



Table 581 provides description for different DMA Receive Data Level values.

|_Table 581. DMA_<br>_Receive Data Level_<br>_(DMARDL) Decode_<br>_Value_|**DMARDL Value**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
||0000_0000|dma_rx_req is asserted when one or more data entries are present in the receive FIFO|
||0000_0001|dma_rx_req is asserted when two or more data entries are present in the receive FIFO|
||0000_0010|dma_rx_req is asserted when three or more data entries are present in the receive FIFO|
||…|…|
||0000_1101|dma_rx_req is asserted when 14 or more data entries are present in the receive FIFO|
||0000_1110|dma_rx_req is asserted when 15 or more data entries are present in the receive FIFO|
||0000_1111|dma_rx_req is asserted when 16 data entries are present in the receive FIFO|



## **4.10.11.1. Overview of Operation**

As a block flow control device, the DMA Controller is programmed by the processor with the number of data items (block size) that are to be transmitted or received by the DW_apb_ssi.

The block is broken into a number of transactions, each initiated by a request from the DW_apb_ssi. The DMA Controller must also be programmed with the number of data items (in this case, DW_apb_ssi FIFO entries) to be transferred for each DMA request. This is also known as the burst transaction length.

Figure 164 shows a single block transfer, where the block size programmed into the DMA Controller is 12 and the burst transaction length is set to four. In this case, the block size is a multiple of the burst transaction length; therefore, the DMA block transfer consists of a series of burst transactions.

##  **CAUTION**

On RP2040, the burst transaction length of the SSI’s DMA interface is fixed at four transfers. SSI.DMARDLR must always be equal to 4, which is the value it takes at reset. The SSI will then request a single transfer when it has between one and three items in its FIFO, and a 4-burst when it has four or more.

4.10. SSI

**596**

RP2040 Datasheet

**==> picture [356 x 219] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 164.<br>Breakdown of DMA 12 Data Items<br>Transfer into Burst<br>Transactions. Block<br>DMA<br>size,<br>DMA.CTLx.BLOCKS_TS  = Multi-block Transfer<br>12. Number of data Level<br>items per source burst<br>transaction,<br>12 Data Items<br>DMA.CTLx.SRC_MSIZE  =<br>4. SSI receive FIFO<br>watermark level, DMA<br>SSI.DMARDLR  + 1 = Block<br>DMA.CTLx.SRC_MSIZE  =<br>Level<br>4<br>DMA Burst  DMA Burst  DMA Burst<br>Transaction 1 Transaction 2 Transaction 3<br>4 Data Items 4 Data Items 4 Data Items<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


If the DW_apb_ssi makes a transmit request to this channel, four data items are written to the DW_apb_ssi transmit FIFO. Similarly, if the DW_apb_ssi makes a receive request to this channel, four data items are read from the DW_apb_ssi receive FIFO. Three separate requests must be made to this DMA channel before all 12 data items are written or read.

When the block size programmed into the DMA Controller is not a multiple of the burst transaction length, as shown in Figure 165, a series of burst transactions followed by single transactions are needed to complete the block transfer.

**==> picture [356 x 152] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Figure 165.<br>15 Data Items<br>Breakdown of DMA<br>Transfer into Single DMA<br>and Burst Multi-block Transfer<br>Transactions. Block Level<br>size,<br>DMA.CTLx.BLOCK_TS  = 15 Data Items<br>15. Number of data<br>DMA<br>items per burst Block<br>transaction, Level<br>DMA.CTLx.DEST_MSIZE<br>= 4. SSI transmit FIFO<br>watermark level, DMA Burst  DMA Burst  DMA Burst  DMA Single  DMA Single  DMA Single<br>SSI.DMATDLR  = Transaction 1 Transaction 2 Transaction 3 Transaction 1 Transaction 2 Transaction 3<br>DMA.CTLx.DEST_MSIZE<br>= 4 4 Data Items 4 Data Items 4 Data Items 1 Data Items 1 Data Items 1 Data Items<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **4.10.12. APB Interface**

The host processor accesses data, control, and status information on the DW_apb_ssi through the APB interface. APB accesses to the DW_apb_ssi peripheral are described in the following subsections.

## **4.10.12.1. Control and Status Register APB Access**

Control and status registers within the DW_apb_ssi are byte-addressable. The maximum width of the control or status register in the DW_apb_ssi is 16 bits. Therefore all read and write operations to the DW_apb_ssi control and status registers require only one APB access.

4.10. SSI

**597**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **4.10.12.2. Data Register APB Access**

The data register (DR) within the DW_apb_ssi is 32 bits wide in order to remain consistent with the maximum serial transfer size (data frame). An APB write operation to DR moves data from pwdata into the transmit FIFO buffer. An APB read operation from DR moves data from the receive FIFO buffer onto prdata.

The DW_apb_ssi DR can be written/read in one APB access.

##  **NOTE**

The DR register in the DW_apb_ssi occupies sixty-four 32-bit locations of the memory map to facilitate AHB burst transfers. There are no burst transactions on the APB bus itself, but DW_apb_ssi supports the AHB bursts that happen on the AHB side of the AHB/APB bridge. Writing to any of these address locations has the same effect as pushing the data from the pwdata bus into the transmit FIFO. Reading from any of these locations has the same effect as popping data from the receive FIFO onto the prdata bus. The FIFO buffers on the DW_apb_ssi are not addressable.

## **4.10.13. List of Registers**

The SSI registers start at a base address of 0x18000000 (defined as XIP_SSI_BASE in SDK).

_Table 582. List of SSI registers_

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x00|CTRLR0|Control register 0|
|0x04|CTRLR1|Master Control register 1|
|0x08|SSIENR|SSI Enable|
|0x0c|MWCR|Microwire Control|
|0x10|SER|Slave enable|
|0x14|BAUDR|Baud rate|
|0x18|TXFTLR|TX FIFO threshold level|
|0x1c|RXFTLR|RX FIFO threshold level|
|0x20|TXFLR|TX FIFO level|
|0x24|RXFLR|RX FIFO level|
|0x28|SR|Status register|
|0x2c|IMR|Interrupt mask|
|0x30|ISR|Interrupt status|
|0x34|RISR|Raw interrupt status|
|0x38|TXOICR|TX FIFO overflow interrupt clear|
|0x3c|RXOICR|RX FIFO overflow interrupt clear|
|0x40|RXUICR|RX FIFO underflow interrupt clear|
|0x44|MSTICR|Multi-master interrupt clear|
|0x48|ICR|Interrupt clear|
|0x4c|DMACR|DMA control|
|0x50|DMATDLR|DMA TX data level|
|0x54|DMARDLR|DMA RX data level|



4.10. SSI

**598**

RP2040 Datasheet

|**Offset**|**Name**|**Info**|
|---|---|---|
|0x58|IDR|Identification register|
|0x5c|SSI_VERSION_ID|Version ID|
|0x60|DR0|Data Register 0 (of 36)|
|0xf0|RX_SAMPLE_DLY|RX sample delay|
|0xf4|SPI_CTRLR0|SPI control|
|0xf8|TXD_DRIVE_EDGE|TX drive edge|



## **SSI: CTRLR0 Register**

## **Offset** : 0x00

## **Description**

Control register 0

|_Table 583. CTRLR0_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:25|Reserved.|-|-|
||24|**SSTE**: Slave select toggle enable|RW|0x0|
||23|Reserved.|-|-|
||22:21|**SPI_FRF**: SPI frame format|RW|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→STD: Standard 1-bit SPI frame format; 1 bit per SCK, full-duplex|||
|||0x1→DUAL: Dual-SPI frame format; two bits per SCK, half-duplex|||
|||0x2→QUAD: Quad-SPI frame format; four bits per SCK, half-duplex|||
||20:16|**DFS_32**: Data frame size in 32b transfer mode<br>Value of n→n+1 clocks per frame.|RW|0x00|
||15:12|**CFS**: Control frame size<br>Value of n→n+1 clocks per frame.|RW|0x0|
||11|**SRL**: Shift register loop (test mode)|RW|0x0|
||10|**SLV_OE**: Slave output enable|RW|0x0|
||9:8|**TMOD**: Transfer mode|RW|0x0|
|||Enumerated values:|||
|||0x0→TX_AND_RX: Both transmit and receive|||
|||0x1→TX_ONLY: Transmit only (not for FRF == 0, standard SPI mode)|||
|||0x2→RX_ONLY: Receive only (not for FRF == 0, standard SPI mode)|||
|||0x3→EEPROM_READ: EEPROM read mode (TX then RX; RX starts after<br>control data TX’d)|||
||7|**SCPOL**: Serial clock polarity|RW|0x0|
||6|**SCPH**: Serial clock phase|RW|0x0|
||5:4|**FRF**: Frame format|RW|0x0|
||3:0|**DFS**: Data frame size|RW|0x0|



4.10. SSI

**599**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **SSI: CTRLR1 Register**

**Offset** : 0x04

## **Description**

Master Control register 1

_Table 584. CTRLR1 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:0|**NDF**: Number of data frames|RW|0x0000|



## **SSI: SSIENR Register**

**Offset** : 0x08

## **Description**

SSI Enable

_Table 585. SSIENR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|**SSI_EN**: SSI enable|RW|0x0|



## **SSI: MWCR Register**

**Offset** : 0x0c

## **Description**

Microwire Control

_Table 586. MWCR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:3|Reserved.|-|-|
|2|**MHS**: Microwire handshaking|RW|0x0|
|1|**MDD**: Microwire control|RW|0x0|
|0|**MWMOD**: Microwire transfer mode|RW|0x0|



## **SSI: SER Register**

**Offset** : 0x10

## **Description**

Slave enable

_Table 587. SER Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|For each bit:<br>0→slave not selected<br>1→slave selected|RW|0x0|



## **SSI: BAUDR Register**

**Offset** : 0x14

**Description**

Baud rate

4.10. SSI

**600**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 588. BAUDR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:16|Reserved.|-|-|
|15:0|**SCKDV**: SSI clock divider|RW|0x0000|



## **SSI: TXFTLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x18

## **Description**

TX FIFO threshold level

_Table 589. TXFTLR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
|7:0|**TFT**: Transmit FIFO threshold|RW|0x00|



## **SSI: RXFTLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x1c

## **Description**

RX FIFO threshold level

|_Table 590. RXFTLR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**RFT**: Receive FIFO threshold|RW|0x00|



## **SSI: TXFLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x20

## **Description**

TX FIFO level

|_Table 591. TXFLR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**TFTFL**: Transmit FIFO level|RO|0x00|



## **SSI: RXFLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x24

## **Description**

RX FIFO level

|_Table 592. RXFLR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**RXTFL**: Receive FIFO level|RO|0x00|



## **SSI: SR Register**

**Offset** : 0x28

4.10. SSI

**601**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **Description**

Status register

_Table 593. SR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:7|Reserved.|-|-|
|6|**DCOL**: Data collision error|RO|0x0|
|5|**TXE**: Transmission error|RO|0x0|
|4|**RFF**: Receive FIFO full|RO|0x0|
|3|**RFNE**: Receive FIFO not empty|RO|0x0|
|2|**TFE**: Transmit FIFO empty|RO|0x0|
|1|**TFNF**: Transmit FIFO not full|RO|0x0|
|0|**BUSY**: SSI busy flag|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: IMR Register**

**Offset** : 0x2c

## **Description**

Interrupt mask

|_Table 594. IMR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5|**MSTIM**: Multi-master contention interrupt mask|RW|0x0|
||4|**RXFIM**: Receive FIFO full interrupt mask|RW|0x0|
||3|**RXOIM**: Receive FIFO overflow interrupt mask|RW|0x0|
||2|**RXUIM**: Receive FIFO underflow interrupt mask|RW|0x0|
||1|**TXOIM**: Transmit FIFO overflow interrupt mask|RW|0x0|
||0|**TXEIM**: Transmit FIFO empty interrupt mask|RW|0x0|



## **SSI: ISR Register**

**Offset** : 0x30

## **Description**

Interrupt status

|_Table 595. ISR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
||5|**MSTIS**: Multi-master contention interrupt status|RO|0x0|
||4|**RXFIS**: Receive FIFO full interrupt status|RO|0x0|
||3|**RXOIS**: Receive FIFO overflow interrupt status|RO|0x0|
||2|**RXUIS**: Receive FIFO underflow interrupt status|RO|0x0|
||1|**TXOIS**: Transmit FIFO overflow interrupt status|RO|0x0|
||0|**TXEIS**: Transmit FIFO empty interrupt status|RO|0x0|



4.10. SSI

**602**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **SSI: RISR Register**

**Offset** : 0x34

## **Description**

Raw interrupt status

_Table 596. RISR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:6|Reserved.|-|-|
|5|**MSTIR**: Multi-master contention raw interrupt status|RO|0x0|
|4|**RXFIR**: Receive FIFO full raw interrupt status|RO|0x0|
|3|**RXOIR**: Receive FIFO overflow raw interrupt status|RO|0x0|
|2|**RXUIR**: Receive FIFO underflow raw interrupt status|RO|0x0|
|1|**TXOIR**: Transmit FIFO overflow raw interrupt status|RO|0x0|
|0|**TXEIR**: Transmit FIFO empty raw interrupt status|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: TXOICR Register**

## **Offset** : 0x38

## **Description**

TX FIFO overflow interrupt clear

_Table 597. TXOICR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|Clear-on-read transmit FIFO overflow interrupt|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: RXOICR Register**

**Offset** : 0x3c

## **Description**

RX FIFO overflow interrupt clear

_Table 598. RXOICR Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
|0|Clear-on-read receive FIFO overflow interrupt|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: RXUICR Register**

**Offset** : 0x40

## **Description**

RX FIFO underflow interrupt clear

4.10. SSI

**603**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 599. RXUICR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|Clear-on-read receive FIFO underflow interrupt|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: MSTICR Register**

**Offset** : 0x44

## **Description**

Multi-master interrupt clear

|_Table 600. MSTICR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|Clear-on-read multi-master contention interrupt|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: ICR Register**

**Offset** : 0x48 **Description**

Interrupt clear

|_Table 601. ICR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:1|Reserved.|-|-|
||0|Clear-on-read all active interrupts|RO|0x0|



## **SSI: DMACR Register**

**Offset** : 0x4c

## **Description**

DMA control

|_Table 602. DMACR_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 603. DMATDLR_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:2|Reserved.|-|-|
||1|**TDMAE**: Transmit DMA enable|RW|0x0|
||0|**RDMAE**: Receive DMA enable|RW|0x0|
||**SSI: DMATDLR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x50<br>**Description**<br>DMA TX data level||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**DMATDL**: Transmit data watermark level|RW|0x00|



## **SSI: DMARDLR Register**

**Offset** : 0x54

4.10. SSI

**604**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Table 604. DMARDLR_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 605. IDR_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 606._<br>_SSI_VERSION_ID_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 607. DR0_<br>_Register_<br>_Table 608._<br>_RX_SAMPLE_DLY_<br>_Register_|**Description**<br>DMA RX data level|**Description**<br>DMA RX data level|**Description**<br>DMA RX data level|**Description**<br>DMA RX data level|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**DMARDL**: Receive data watermark level (DMARDLR+1)|RW|0x00|
||**SSI: IDR Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x58<br>**Description**<br>Identification register||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|**IDCODE**: Peripheral dentification code|RO|0x51535049|
||**SSI: SSI_VERSION_ID Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x5c<br>**Description**<br>Version ID||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|**SSI_COMP_VERSION**: SNPS component version (format X.YY)|RO|0x3430312a|
||**SSI: DR0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0x60<br>**Description**<br>Data Register 0 (of 36)||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:0|**DR**: First data register of 36|RW|0x00000000|
||**SSI: RX_SAMPLE_DLY Register**<br>**Offset**: 0xf0<br>**Description**<br>RX sample delay||||
||**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**RSD**: RXD sample delay (in SCLK cycles)|RW|0x00|
||**SSI: SPI_CTRLR0 Register**<br>**Offset**: 0xf4<br>**Description**||||



SPI control

4.10. SSI

**605**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 609. SPI_CTRLR0 Register_

|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|
|31:24|**XIP_CMD**: SPI Command to send in XIP mode (INST_L = 8-bit) or to append to<br>Address (INST_L = 0-bit)|RW|0x03|
|23:19|Reserved.|-|-|
|18|**SPI_RXDS_EN**: Read data strobe enable|RW|0x0|
|17|**INST_DDR_EN**: Instruction DDR transfer enable|RW|0x0|
|16|**SPI_DDR_EN**: SPI DDR transfer enable|RW|0x0|
|15:11|**WAIT_CYCLES**: Wait cycles between control frame transmit and data<br>reception (in SCLK cycles)|RW|0x00|
|10|Reserved.|-|-|
|9:8|**INST_L**: Instruction length (0/4/8/16b)|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→NONE: No instruction|||
||0x1→4B: 4-bit instruction|||
||0x2→8B: 8-bit instruction|||
||0x3→16B: 16-bit instruction|||
|7:6|Reserved.|-|-|
|5:2|**ADDR_L**: Address length (0b-60b in 4b increments)|RW|0x0|
|1:0|**TRANS_TYPE**: Address and instruction transfer format|RW|0x0|
||Enumerated values:|||
||0x0→1C1A: Command and address both in standard SPI frame format|||
||0x1→1C2A: Command in standard SPI format, address in format specified<br>by FRF|||
||0x2→2C2A: Command and address both in format specified by FRF (e.g.<br>Dual-SPI)|||



## **SSI: TXD_DRIVE_EDGE Register**

**Offset** : 0xf8

## **Description**

TX drive edge

|_Table 610._<br>_TXD_DRIVE_EDGE_<br>_Register_|**Bits**|**Description**|**Type**|**Reset**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||31:8|Reserved.|-|-|
||7:0|**TDE**: TXD drive edge|RW|0x00|



4.10. SSI

**606**
