## **3.2. Programmer’s Model**

The four state machines execute from a shared instruction memory. System software loads programs into this memory, configures the state machines and IO mapping, and then sets the state machines running. PIO programs come from various sources: assembled directly by the user, drawn from the PIO library, or generated programmatically by user software.

From this point on, state machines are generally autonomous, and system software interacts through DMA, interrupts and control registers, as with other peripherals on RP2040. For more complex interfaces, PIO provides a small but flexible set of primitives which allow system software to be more hands-on with state machine control flow.

_Figure 39. State machine overview. Data flows in and out through a pair of FIFOs. The state machine executes a program which transfers data between these FIFOs, a set of internal registers, and the pins. The clock divider can reduce the state machine’s execution speed by a constant factor._

**==> picture [298 x 162] intentionally omitted <==**

## **3.2.1. PIO Programs**

PIO state machines execute short, binary programs.

Programs for common interfaces, such as UART, SPI, or I2C, are available in the PIO library, so in many cases, it is not necessary to write PIO programs. However, the PIO is much more flexible when programmed directly, supporting a wide

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**312**

RP2040 Datasheet

variety of interfaces which may not have been foreseen by its designers.

The PIO has a total of nine instructions: JMP, WAIT, IN, OUT, PUSH, PULL, MOV, IRQ, and SET. See Section 3.4 for details on these instructions.

Though the PIO only has a total of nine instructions, it would be difficult to edit PIO program binaries by hand. PIO assembly is a textual format, describing a PIO program, where each command corresponds to one instruction in the output binary. Below is an example program in PIO assembly:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave.pio Lines 8 - 13_

8 .program squarewave 9     set pindirs, 1   ; Set pin to output 10 again: 11     set pins, 1 [1]  ; Drive pin high and then delay for one cycle 12     set pins, 0      ; Drive pin low 13     jmp again        ; Set PC to label `again`

The PIO assembler is included with the SDK, and is called pioasm. This program processes a PIO assembly input text file, which may contain multiple programs, and writes out the assembled programs ready for use. For the SDK these assembled programs are emitted in form of C headers, containing constant arrays: For more information see Section 3.3

## **3.2.2. Control Flow**

On every system clock cycle, each state machine fetches, decodes and executes one instruction. Each instruction takes precisely one cycle, unless it explicitly stalls (such as the WAIT instruction). Instructions may also insert a delay of up to 31 cycles before the next instruction is executed to aid the writing of cycle-exact programs.

The program counter, or PC, points to the location in the instruction memory being executed on this cycle. Generally, PC increments by one each cycle, wrapping at the end of the instruction memory. Jump instructions are an exception and explicitly provide the next value that PC will take.

Our example assembly program (listed as .program squarewave above) shows both of these concepts in practice. It drives a 50/50 duty cycle square wave onto a GPIO, with a period of four cycles. Using some other features (e.g. side-set) this can be made as low as two cycles.

##  **NOTE**

Side-set is where a state machine drives a small number of GPIOs _in addition to_ the main side effects of the instruction it executes. It’s described fully in Section 3.5.1.

The system has write-only access to the instruction memory, which is used to load programs:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave.c Lines 34 - 38_

34 _// Load the assembled program directly into the PIO's instruction memory._ 35 _// Each PIO instance has a 32-slot instruction memory, which all 4 state_ 36 _// machines can see. The system has write-only access._ 37     for (uint i = 0; i < count_of(squarewave_program_instructions); ++i) 38         pio->instr_mem[i] = squarewave_program_instructions[i];

The clock divider slows the state machine’s execution by a constant factor, represented as a 16.8 fixed-point fractional number. Using the above example, if a clock division of 2.5 were programmed, the square wave would have a period of cycles. This is useful for setting a precise baud rate for a serial interface, such as a UART.

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**313**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave.c Lines 42 - 47_

42 _// Configure state machine 0 to run at sysclk/2.5. The state machines can_ 43 _// run as fast as one instruction per clock cycle, but we can scale their_ 44 _// speed down uniformly to meet some precise frequency target, e.g. for a_ 45 _// UART baud rate. This register has 16 integer divisor bits and 8_ 46 _// fractional divisor bits._ 47     pio->sm[0].clkdiv = (uint32_t) (2.5f * (1 << 16));

The above code fragments are part of a complete code example which drives a 12.5MHz square wave out of GPIO 0 (or any other pins we might choose to map). We can also use pins WAIT PIN instruction to stall a state machine’s execution for some amount of time, or a JMP PIN instruction to branch on the state of a pin, so control flow can vary based on pin state.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave.c Lines 51 - 59_

51 _// There are five pin mapping groups (out, in, set, side-set, jmp pin)_ 52 _// which are used by different instructions or in different circumstances._ 53 _// Here we're just using SET instructions. Configure state machine 0 SETs_ 54 _// to affect GPIO 0 only; then configure GPIO0 to be controlled by PIO0,_ 55 _// as opposed to e.g. the processors._ 56     pio->sm[0].pinctrl = 57             (1 << PIO_SM0_PINCTRL_SET_COUNT_LSB) | 58             (0 << PIO_SM0_PINCTRL_SET_BASE_LSB); 59     gpio_set_function(0, pio_get_funcsel(pio));

The system can start and stop each state machine at any time, via the CTRL register. Multiple state machines can be started simultaneously, and the deterministic nature of PIO means they can stay perfectly synchronised.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave.c Lines 63 - 67_

63 _// Set the state machine running. The PIO CTRL register is global within a_ 64 _// PIO instance, so you can start/stop multiple state machines_ 65 _// simultaneously. We're using the register's hardware atomic set alias to_ 66 _// make one bit high without doing a read-modify-write on the register._ 67     hw_set_bits(&pio->ctrl, 1 << (PIO_CTRL_SM_ENABLE_LSB + 0));

Most instructions are executed from the instruction memory, but there are other sources, which can be freely mixed:

- [Instructions written to a special configuration register (][SMx INSTR][) are immediately executed, momentarily] interrupting other execution. For example, a JMP instruction written to SMx INSTR will cause the state machine to start executing from a different location.

- [Instructions can be executed from a register, using the ][MOV EXEC][ instruction.]

- [Instructions can be executed from the output shifter, using the ][OUT EXEC][ instruction]

The last of these is particularly versatile: instructions can be embedded in the stream of data passing through the FIFO. The I2C example uses this to embed e.g. STOP and RESTART line conditions alongside normal data. In the case of MOV and OUT EXEC, the MOV/OUT itself executes in one cycle, and the executee on the next.

## **3.2.3. Registers**

Each state machine possesses a small number of internal registers. These hold input or output data, and temporary values such as loop counter variables.

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**314**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **3.2.3.1. Output Shift Register (OSR)**

_Figure 40. Output Shift Register (OSR). Data is parcelled out 1…32 bits at a time, and unused data is recycled by a bidirectional shifter. Once empty, the OSR_ The Output Shift Register (OSR) holds and shifts output data, between the TX FIFO and the pins (or other destinations, _is reloaded from the_ such as the scratch registers). _TX FIFO._

- [PULL][ instructions: remove a 32-bit word from the TX FIFO and place into the OSR.]

- [OUT][ instructions shift data from the OSR to other destinations, 1…32 bits at a time.]

- [The OSR fills with zeroes as data is shifted out]

- [The state machine will automatically refill the OSR from the FIFO on an ][OUT][ instruction, once some total shift count] threshold is reached, if autopull is enabled

- [Shift direction can be left/right, configurable by the processor via configuration registers]

For example, to stream data through the FIFO and output to the pins at a rate of one byte per two clocks:

1 .program pull_example1 2 loop: 3     out pins, 8 4 public entry_point: 5     pull 6     out pins, 8 [1] 7     out pins, 8 [1] 8     out pins, 8 9     jmp loop

Autopull (see Section 3.5.4) allows the hardware to automatically refill the OSR in the majority of cases, with the state machine stalling if it tries to OUT from an empty OSR. This has two benefits:

- [No instructions spent on explicitly pulling from FIFO at the right time]

- [Higher throughput: can output up to 32 bits on every single clock cycle, if the FIFO stays topped up]

After configuring autopull, the above program can be simplified to the following, which behaves identically:

1 .program pull_example2 2 3 loop: 4     out pins, 8 5 public entry_point: 6     jmp loop

Program wrapping (Section 3.5.2) allows further simplification and, if desired, an output of 1 byte every system clock cycle.

1 .program pull_example3 2 3 public entry_point: 4 .wrap_target 5     out pins, 8 [1] 6 .wrap

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**315**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **3.2.3.2. Input Shift Register (ISR)**

_Figure 41. Input Shift Register (ISR). Data enters 1…32 bits at a time, and current contents is shifted left or right to make room._ •[IN][ instructions shift 1…32 bits at a time into the register.] _Once full, contents is written to the RX FIFO._

- [PUSH][ instructions write the ISR contents to the RX FIFO.]

- [The ISR is cleared to all-zeroes when pushed.]

- [The state machine will automatically push the ISR on an ][IN][ instruction, once some shift threshold is reached, if] autopush is enabled.

- [Shift direction is configurable by the processor via configuration registers]

Some peripherals, like UARTs, must shift in from the left to get correct bit order, since the wire order is LSB-first; however, the processor may expect the resulting byte to be right-aligned. This is solved by the special null input source, which allows the programmer to shift some number of zeroes into the ISR, following the data.

## **3.2.3.3. Shift Counters**

State machines remember how many bits, in total, have been shifted out of the OSR via OUT instructions, and into the ISR via IN instructions. This information is tracked at all times by a pair of hardware counters — the output shift counter and the input shift counter — each capable of holding values from 0 to 32 inclusive. With each shift operation, the relevant counter is incremented by the shift count, up to the maximum value of 32 (equal to the width of the shift register). The state machine can be configured to perform certain actions when a counter reaches a configurable threshold:

- [The OSR can be automatically refilled once some number of bits have been shifted out. See ][Section 3.5.4]

- [The ISR can be automatically emptied once some number of bits have been shifted in. See ][Section 3.5.4]

- [PUSH][ or ][PULL][ instructions can be conditioned on the input or output shift counter, respectively]

On PIO reset, or the assertion of CTRL_SM_RESTART, the input shift counter is cleared to 0 (nothing yet shifted in), and the output shift counter is initialised to 32 (nothing remaining to be shifted out; fully exhausted). Some other instructions affect the shift counters:

- [A successful ][PULL][ clears the output shift counter to 0]

- [A successful ][PUSH][ clears the input shift counter to 0]

- MOV OSR, … (i.e. any MOV instruction that writes OSR) clears the output shift counter to 0

- MOV ISR, … (i.e. any MOV instruction that writes ISR) clears the input shift counter to 0

- [OUT ISR, count][ sets the input shift counter to ][count]

## **3.2.3.4. Scratch Registers**

Each state machine has two 32-bit internal scratch registers, called X and Y.

They are used as:

- [Source/destination for ][IN][/][OUT][/][SET][/][MOV]

- [Source for branch conditions]

For example, suppose we wanted to produce a long pulse for "1" data bits, and a short pulse for "0" data bits:

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**316**

RP2040 Datasheet

1 .program ws2812_led 2 3 public entry_point: 4     pull 5     set x, 23       ; Loop over 24 bits 6 bitloop: 7     set pins, 1     ; Drive pin high 8     out y, 1 [5]    ; Shift 1 bit out, and write it to y 9     jmp !y skip     ; Skip the extra delay if the bit was 0 10     nop [5] 11 skip: 12     set pins, 0 [5] 13     jmp x-- bitloop ; Jump if x nonzero, and decrement x 14     jmp entry_point

Here X is used as a loop counter, and Y is used as a temporary variable for branching on single bits from the OSR. This program can be used to drive a WS2812 LED interface, although more compact implementations are possible (as few as 3 instructions).

MOV allows the use of the scratch registers to save/restore the shift registers if, for example, you would like to repeatedly shift out the same sequence.

##  **NOTE**

A much more compact WS2812 example (4 instructions total) is shown in Section 3.6.2

## **3.2.3.5. FIFOs**

Each state machine has a pair of 4-word deep FIFOs, one for data transfer from system to state machine (TX), and the other for state machine to system (RX). The TX FIFO is written to by system busmasters, such as a processor or DMA controller, and the RX FIFO is written to by the state machine. FIFOs decouple the timing of the PIO state machines and the system bus, allowing state machines to go for longer periods without processor intervention.

FIFOs also generate data request (DREQ) signals, which allow a system DMA controller to pace its reads/writes based on the presence of data in an RX FIFO, or space for new data in a TX FIFO. This allows a processor to set up a long transaction, potentially involving many kilobytes of data, which will proceed with no further processor intervention.

Often, a state machine is only transferring data in one direction. In this case the SHIFTCTRL_FJOIN option can merge the two FIFOs into a single 8-entry FIFO going in one direction only. This is useful for high-bandwidth interfaces such as DPI.

## **3.2.4. Stalling**

State machines may momentarily pause execution for a number of reasons:

- [A ][WAIT][ instruction’s condition is not yet met]

- [A blocking ][PULL][ when the TX FIFO is empty, or a blocking ][PUSH][ when the RX FIFO is full]

- [An ][IRQ WAIT][ instruction which has set an IRQ flag, and is waiting for it to clear]

- [An ][OUT][ instruction when autopull is enabled, and OSR has already reached its shift threshold]

- [An ][IN][ instruction when autopush is enabled, ISR reaches its shift threshold, and the RX FIFO is full]

In this case, the program counter does not advance, and the state machine will continue executing this instruction on the next cycle. If the instruction specifies some number of delay cycles before the next instruction starts, these do not begin until **after** the stall clears.

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**317**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

Side-set (Section 3.5.1) is not affected by stalls, and always takes place on the first cycle of the attached instruction.

## **3.2.5. Pin Mapping**

PIO controls the output level and direction of up to 32 GPIOs, and can observe their input levels. On every system clock cycle, each state machine may do none, one, or both of the following:

- [Change the level or direction of some GPIOs via an ][OUT][ or ][SET][ instruction, or read some GPIOs via an ][IN][ instruction]

- [Change the level or direction of some GPIOs via a side-set operation]

Each of these operations is on one of four contiguous ranges of GPIOs, with the base and count of each range configured via each state machine’s PINCTRL register. There is a range for each of OUT, SET, IN and side-set operations. Each range can cover any of the GPIOs accessible to a given PIO block (on RP2040 this is the 30 user GPIOs), and the ranges can overlap.

For each individual GPIO output (level and direction separately), PIO considers all 8 writes that may have occurred on that cycle, and applies the write from the highest-numbered state machine. If the same state machine performs a SET /OUT and a side-set on the same GPIO simultaneously, the side-set is used. If no state machine writes to this GPIO output, its value does not change from the previous cycle.

Generally each state machine’s outputs are mapped to a distinct group of GPIOs, implementing some peripheral interface.

## **3.2.6. IRQ Flags**

IRQ flags are state bits which can be set or cleared by state machines or the system. There are 8 in total: all 8 are visible to all state machines, and the lower 4 can also be masked into one of PIO’s interrupt request lines, via the IRQ0_INTE and IRQ1_INTE control registers.

They have two main uses:

- [Asserting system level interrupts from a state machine program, and optionally waiting for the interrupt to be] acknowledged

- [Synchronising execution between two state machines]

State machines interact with the flags via the IRQ and WAIT instructions.

## **3.2.7. Interactions Between State Machines**

The instruction memory is implemented as a 1-write 4-read register file, so all four state machines can read an instruction on the same cycle, without stalling.

There are three ways to apply the multiple state machines:

- [Pointing multiple state machines at the same program]

- [Pointing multiple state machines at different programs]

- [Using multiple state machines to run different parts of the same interface, e.g. TX and RX side of a UART, or] clock/hsync and pixel data on a DPI display

State machines can not communicate data, but they can synchronise with one another by using the IRQ flags. There are 8 flags total (the lower four of which can be masked for use as system IRQs), and each state machine can set or clear any flag using the IRQ instruction, and can wait for a flag to go high or low using the WAIT IRQ instruction. This allows cycle-accurate synchronisation between state machines.

3.2. Programmer’s Model

**318**

RP2040 Datasheet
