## **3.4. Instruction Set**

## **3.4.1. Summary**

PIO instructions are 16 bits long, and have the following encoding:

3.4. Instruction Set

**321**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Table 366. PIO instruction encoding_

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|JMP|0|0|0|Delay/side-set|||||Condition|||Address|||||
|WAIT|0|0|1|Delay/side-set|||||Pol|Source||Index|||||
|IN|0|1|0|Delay/side-set|||||Source|||Bit count|||||
|OUT|0|1|1|Delay/side-set|||||Destination|||Bit count|||||
|PUSH|1|0|0|Delay/side-set|||||0|IfF|Blk|0|0|0|0|0|
|PULL|1|0|0|Delay/side-set|||||1|IfE|Blk|0|0|0|0|0|
|MOV|1|0|1|Delay/side-set|||||Destination|||Op||Source|||
|IRQ|1|1|0|Delay/side-set|||||0|Clr|Wait|Index|||||
|SET|1|1|1|Delay/side-set|||||Destination|||Data|||||



All PIO instructions execute in one clock cycle.

The function of the 5-bit Delay/side-set field depends on the state machine’s SIDESET_COUNT configuration:

- [Up to 5 LSBs (5 minus ][SIDESET_COUNT][) encode a number of idle cycles inserted between this instruction and the next.]

- [Up to 5 MSBs, set by ][SIDESET_COUNT][, encode a side-set (][Section 3.5.1][), which can assert a constant onto some] GPIOs, concurrently with main instruction execution.

## **3.4.2. JMP**

## **3.4.2.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|JMP|0|0|0|Delay/side-set|||||Condition|||Address|||||



## **3.4.2.2. Operation**

Set program counter to Address if Condition is true, otherwise no operation.

Delay cycles on a JMP always take effect, whether Condition is true or false, and they take place _after_ Condition is evaluated and the program counter is updated.

- [Condition:]

   - [000: ] _[(no condition)]_[: Always]

   - [001: ][!X][: scratch X zero]

   - [010: ][X--][: scratch X non-zero, prior to decrement]

   - [011: ][!Y][: scratch Y zero]

   - [100: ][Y--][: scratch Y non-zero, prior to decrement]

   - [101: ][X!=Y][: scratch X not equal scratch Y]

   - [110: ][PIN][: branch on input pin]

   - [111: ][!OSRE][: output shift register not empty]

- [Address: Instruction address to jump to. In the instruction encoding this is an absolute address within the PIO] instruction memory.

3.4. Instruction Set

**322**

RP2040 Datasheet

JMP PIN branches on the GPIO selected by EXECCTRL_JMP_PIN, a configuration field which selects one out of the maximum of 32 GPIO inputs visible to a state machine, independently of the state machine’s other input mapping. The branch is taken if the GPIO is high.

!OSRE compares the bits shifted out since the last PULL with the shift count threshold configured by SHIFTCTRL_PULL_THRESH. This is the same threshold used by autopull (Section 3.5.4).

JMP X-- and JMP Y-- always decrement scratch register X or Y, respectively. The decrement is not conditional on the current value of the scratch register. The branch is conditioned on the _initial_ value of the register, i.e. before the decrement took place: if the register is initially nonzero, the branch is taken.

## **3.4.2.3. Assembler Syntax**

_jmp_ ( _<cond>_ ) _<target>_

where:

_<cond>_ Is an optional condition listed above (e.g. !x for scratch X zero). If a condition code is not specified, the branch is always taken

_<target>_ Is a program label or value (see Section 3.3.2) representing instruction offset within the program (the first instruction being offset 0). Note that because the PIO JMP instruction uses absolute addresses in the PIO instruction memory, JMPs need to be adjusted based on the program load offset at runtime. This is handled for you when loading a program with the SDK, but care should be taken when encoding JMP instructions for use by OUT EXEC

## **3.4.3. WAIT**

## **3.4.3.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|WAIT|0|0|1|Delay/side-set|||||Pol|Source||Index|||||



## **3.4.3.2. Operation**

Stall until some condition is met.

Like all stalling instructions (Section 3.2.4), delay cycles begin after the instruction _completes_ . That is, if any delay cycles are present, they do not begin counting until _after_ the wait condition is met.

- [Polarity:]

   - [1: wait for a 1.]

   - [0: wait for a 0.]

- [Source: what to wait on. Values are:]

   - [00: ][GPIO][: System GPIO input selected by ][Index][. This is an absolute GPIO index, and is not affected by the state] machine’s input IO mapping.

   - [01: ][PIN][: Input pin selected by ][Index][. This state machine’s input IO mapping is applied first, and then ][Index] selects which of the mapped bits to wait on. In other words, the pin is selected by adding Index to the PINCTRL_IN_BASE configuration, modulo 32.

   - [10: ][IRQ][: PIO IRQ flag selected by ][Index]

3.4. Instruction Set

**323**

RP2040 Datasheet

   - [11: Reserved]

- [Index: which pin or bit to check.]

WAIT x IRQ behaves slightly differently from other WAIT sources:

- [If ][Polarity][ is 1, the selected IRQ flag is cleared by the state machine upon the wait condition being met.]

- [The flag index is decoded in the same way as the ][IRQ][ index field: if the MSB is set, the state machine ID (0…3) is] added to the IRQ index, by way of modulo-4 addition on the two LSBs. For example, state machine 2 with a flag value of '0x11' will wait on flag 3, and a flag value of '0x13' will wait on flag 1. This allows multiple state machines running the same program to synchronise with each other.

##  **CAUTION**

WAIT 1 IRQ x should not be used with IRQ flags presented to the interrupt controller, to avoid a race condition with a system interrupt handler

## **3.4.3.3. Assembler Syntax**

_wait <polarity> gpio <gpio_num>_

_wait <polarity> pin <pin_num>_

_wait <polarity> irq <irq_num>_ ( _rel_ )

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_<polarity>_|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying the polarity (either 0 or 1)|
|_<pin_num>_|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying the input pin number (as mapped by the SM input pin|
||mapping)|
|_<gpio_num>_|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying the actual GPIO pin number|
|_<irq_num>_(_rel_)|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying The irq number to wait on (0-7). If_rel_is present, then the|
||actual irq number used is calculating by replacing the low two bits of the irq number (_irq_num10_)|
||with the low two bits of the sum (_irq_num10_+_sm_num10_) where_sm_num10_is the state machine|
||number|



## **3.4.4. IN**

## **3.4.4.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|IN|0|1|0|Delay/side-set|||||Source|||Bit count|||||



## **3.4.4.2. Operation**

Shift Bit count bits from Source into the Input Shift Register (ISR). Shift direction is configured for each state machine by SHIFTCTRL_IN_SHIFTDIR. Additionally, increase the input shift count by Bit count, saturating at 32.

- [Source:]

   - [000: ][PINS]

   - [001: ][X][ (scratch register X)]

3.4. Instruction Set

**324**

RP2040 Datasheet

   - [010: ][Y][ (scratch register Y)]

   - [011: ][NULL][ (all zeroes)]

   - [100: Reserved]

   - [101: Reserved]

   - [110: ][ISR]

   - [111: ][OSR]

- [Bit count: How many bits to shift into the ISR. 1…32 bits, 32 is encoded as ][00000][.]

If automatic push is enabled, IN will also push the ISR contents to the RX FIFO if the push threshold is reached (SHIFTCTRL_PUSH_THRESH). IN still executes in one cycle, whether an automatic push takes place or not. The state machine will stall if the RX FIFO is full when an automatic push occurs. An automatic push clears the ISR contents to all-zeroes, and clears the input shift count. See Section 3.5.4.

IN always uses the least significant Bit count bits of the source data. For example, if PINCTRL_IN_BASE is set to 5, the instruction IN PINS, 3 will take the values of pins 5, 6 and 7, and shift these into the ISR. First the ISR is shifted to the left or right to make room for the new input data, then the input data is copied into the gap this leaves. The bit order of the input data is not dependent on the shift direction.

NULL can be used for shifting the ISR’s contents. For example, UARTs receive the LSB first, so must shift to the right. After 8 IN PINS, 1 instructions, the input serial data will occupy bits 31…24 of the ISR. An IN NULL, 24 instruction will shift in 24 zero bits, aligning the input data at ISR bits 7…0. Alternatively, the processor or DMA could perform a byte read from FIFO address + 3, which would take bits 31…24 of the FIFO contents.

## **3.4.4.3. Assembler Syntax**

_in <source>, <bit_count>_

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_<source>_|Is one of the sources specified above.|
|_<bit_count>_|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying the number of bits to shift (valid range 1-32)|



## **3.4.5. OUT**

## **3.4.5.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|OUT|0|1|1|Delay/side-set|||||Destination|||Bit count|||||



## **3.4.5.2. Operation**

Shift Bit count bits out of the Output Shift Register (OSR), and write those bits to Destination. Additionally, increase the output shift count by Bit count, saturating at 32.

- [Destination:]

   - [000: ][PINS]

   - [001: ][X][ (scratch register X)]

   - [010: ][Y][ (scratch register Y)]

3.4. Instruction Set

**325**

RP2040 Datasheet

   - [011: ][NULL][ (discard data)]

   - [100: ][PINDIRS]

   - [101: ][PC]

   - [110: ][ISR][ (also sets ISR shift counter to ][Bit count][)]

   - [111: ][EXEC][ (Execute OSR shift data as instruction)]

- [Bit count: how many bits to shift out of the OSR. 1…32 bits, 32 is encoded as ][00000][.]

A 32-bit value is written to Destination: the lower Bit count bits come from the OSR, and the remainder are zeroes. This value is the least significant Bit count bits of the OSR if SHIFTCTRL_OUT_SHIFTDIR is to the right, otherwise it is the most significant bits.

PINS and PINDIRS use the OUT pin mapping, as described in Section 3.5.6.

If automatic pull is enabled, the OSR is automatically refilled from the TX FIFO if the pull threshold, SHIFTCTRL_PULL_THRESH, is reached. The output shift count is simultaneously cleared to 0. In this case, the OUT will stall if the TX FIFO is empty, but otherwise still executes in one cycle. The specifics are given in Section 3.5.4.

OUT EXEC allows instructions to be included inline in the FIFO datastream. The OUT itself executes on one cycle, and the instruction from the OSR is executed on the next cycle. There are no restrictions on the types of instructions which can be executed by this mechanism. Delay cycles on the initial OUT are ignored, but the executee may insert delay cycles as normal.

OUT PC behaves as an unconditional jump to an address shifted out from the OSR.

## **3.4.5.3. Assembler Syntax**

_out <destination>, <bit_count>_

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_<destination>_|Is one of the destinations specified above.|
|_<bit_count>_|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying the number of bits to shift (valid range 1-32)|



## **3.4.6. PUSH**

## **3.4.6.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|PUSH|1|0|0|Delay/side-set|||||0|IfF|Blk|0|0|0|0|0|



## **3.4.6.2. Operation**

Push the contents of the ISR into the RX FIFO, as a single 32-bit word. Clear ISR to all-zeroes.

- [IfFull][: If 1, do nothing unless the total input shift count has reached its threshold, ][SHIFTCTRL_PUSH_THRESH][ (the same] as for autopush; see Section 3.5.4).

- [Block][: If 1, stall execution if RX FIFO is full.]

PUSH IFFULL helps to make programs more compact, like autopush. It is useful in cases where the IN would stall at an inappropriate time if autopush were enabled, e.g. if the state machine is asserting some external control signal at this point.

3.4. Instruction Set

**326**

RP2040 Datasheet

The PIO assembler sets the Block bit by default. If the Block bit is not set, the PUSH does not stall on a full RX FIFO, instead continuing immediately to the next instruction. The FIFO state and contents are unchanged when this happens. The ISR is still cleared to all-zeroes, and the FDEBUG_RXSTALL flag is set (the same as a blocking PUSH or autopush to a full RX FIFO) to indicate data was lost.

## **3.4.6.3. Assembler Syntax**

_push_ ( _iffull_ )

_push_ ( _iffull_ ) block

_push_ ( _iffull_ ) noblock

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_iffull_|Is equivalent toIfFull == 1above. i.e. the default if this is not specified isIfFull == 0|
|_block_|Is equivalent toBlock == 1above. This is the default if neither_block_nor_noblock_are specified|
|_noblock_|Is equivalent toBlock == 0above.|



## **3.4.7. PULL**

## **3.4.7.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|PULL|1|0|0|Delay/side-set|||||1|IfE|Blk|0|0|0|0|0|



## **3.4.7.2. Operation**

Load a 32-bit word from the TX FIFO into the OSR.

- [IfEmpty][: If 1, do nothing unless the total output shift count has reached its threshold, ][SHIFTCTRL_PULL_THRESH][ (the] same as for autopull; see Section 3.5.4).

- [Block][: If 1, stall if TX FIFO is empty. If 0, pulling from an empty FIFO copies scratch X to OSR.]

Some peripherals (UART, SPI…) should halt when no data is available, and pick it up as it comes in; others (I2S) should clock continuously, and it is better to output placeholder or repeated data than to stop clocking. This can be achieved with the Block parameter.

A nonblocking PULL on an empty FIFO has the same effect as MOV OSR, X. The program can either preload scratch register X with a suitable default, or execute a MOV X, OSR after each PULL NOBLOCK, so that the last valid FIFO word will be recycled until new data is available.

PULL IFEMPTY is useful if an OUT with autopull would stall in an inappropriate location when the TX FIFO is empty. IfEmpty permits some of the same program simplifications as autopull — for example, the elimination of an outer loop counter — but the stall occurs at a controlled point in the program.

3.4. Instruction Set

**327**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

When autopull is enabled, any PULL instruction is a no-op when the OSR is full, so that the PULL instruction behaves as a barrier. OUT NULL, 32 can be used to explicitly discard the OSR contents. See Section 3.5.4.2 for more detail.

## **3.4.7.3. Assembler Syntax**

_pull_ ( _ifempty_ )

_pull_ ( _ifempty_ ) block

_pull_ ( _ifempty_ ) noblock

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_ifempty_|Is equivalent toIfEmpty == 1above. i.e. the default if this is not specified isIfEmpty == 0|
|_block_|Is equivalent toBlock == 1above. This is the default if neither_block_nor_noblock_are specified|
|_noblock_|Is equivalent toBlock == 0above.|



## **3.4.8. MOV**

## **3.4.8.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|MOV|1|0|1|Delay/side-set|||||Destination|||Op||Source|||



## **3.4.8.2. Operation**

Copy data from Source to Destination.

- [Destination:]

   - [000: ][PINS][ (Uses same pin mapping as ][OUT][)]

   - [001: ][X][ (Scratch register X)]

   - [010: ][Y][ (Scratch register Y)]

   - [011: Reserved]

   - [100: ][EXEC][ (Execute data as instruction)]

   - [101: ][PC]

   - [110: ][ISR][ (Input shift counter is reset to 0 by this operation, i.e. empty)]

   - [111: ][OSR][ (Output shift counter is reset to 0 by this operation, i.e. full)]

- [Operation:]

   - [00: None]

   - [01: Invert (bitwise complement)]

   - [10: Bit-reverse]

   - [11: Reserved]

3.4. Instruction Set

**328**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Source:]

   - [000: ][PINS][ (Uses same pin mapping as ][IN][)]

   - [001: ][X]

   - [010: ][Y]

   - [011: ][NULL]

   - [100: Reserved]

   - [101: ][STATUS]

   - [110: ][ISR]

   - [111: ][OSR]

MOV PC causes an unconditional jump. MOV EXEC has the same behaviour as OUT EXEC (Section 3.4.5), and allows register contents to be executed as an instruction. The MOV itself executes in 1 cycle, and the instruction in Source on the next cycle. Delay cycles on MOV EXEC are ignored, but the executee may insert delay cycles as normal.

The STATUS source has a value of all-ones or all-zeroes, depending on some state machine status such as FIFO full/empty, configured by EXECCTRL_STATUS_SEL.

MOV can manipulate the transferred data in limited ways, specified by the Operation argument. Invert sets each bit in Destination to the logical NOT of the corresponding bit in Source, i.e. 1 bits become 0 bits, and vice versa. Bit reverse sets each bit _n_ in Destination to bit 31 - _n_ in Source, assuming the bits are numbered 0 to 31.

MOV dst, PINS reads pins using the IN pin mapping, and writes the full 32-bit value to the destination without masking. The LSB of the read value is the pin indicated by PINCTRL_IN_BASE, and each successive bit comes from a highernumbered pin, wrapping after 31.

## **3.4.8.3. Assembler Syntax**

_mov <destination>,_ ( _op_ ) _<source>_

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_<destination>_|Is one of the destinations specified above.|
|_<op>_|If present, is:|
||!or~for NOT (Note: this is always a bitwise NOT)|
||::for bit reverse|
|_<source>_|Is one of the sources specified above.|



## **3.4.9. IRQ**

## **3.4.9.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|IRQ|1|1|0|Delay/side-set|||||0|Clr|Wait|Index|||||



3.4. Instruction Set

**329**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **3.4.9.2. Operation**

Set or clear the IRQ flag selected by Index argument.

- [Clear: if 1, clear the flag selected by ][Index][, instead of raising it. If ][Clear][ is set, the ][Wait][ bit has no effect.]

- [Wait: if 1, halt until the raised flag is lowered again, e.g. if a system interrupt handler has acknowledged the flag.]

- [Index:]

   - [The 3 LSBs specify an IRQ index from 0-7. This IRQ flag will be set/cleared depending on the Clear bit.]

   - [If the MSB is set, the state machine ID (0…3) is added to the IRQ index, by way of modulo-4 addition on the] two LSBs. For example, state machine 2 with a flag value of 0x11 will raise flag 3, and a flag value of 0x13 will raise flag 1.

IRQ flags 4-7 are visible only to the state machines; IRQ flags 0-3 can be routed out to system level interrupts, on either of the PIO’s two external interrupt request lines, configured by IRQ0_INTE and IRQ1_INTE.

The modulo addition bit allows relative addressing of 'IRQ' and 'WAIT' instructions, for synchronising state machines which are running the same program. Bit 2 (the third LSB) is unaffected by this addition.

If Wait is set, Delay cycles do not begin until after the wait period elapses.

## **3.4.9.3. Assembler Syntax**

_irq <irq_num>_ ( _rel_ ) _irq set <irq_num>_ ( _rel_ ) _irq nowait <irq_num>_ ( _rel_ ) _irq wait <irq_num>_ ( _rel_ ) _irq clear <irq_num>_ ( _rel_ )

where:

|where:||
|---|---|
|_<irq_num>_(_rel_)|Is a value (seeSection 3.3.2) specifying The irq number to wait on (0-7). If_rel_is present, then the|
||actual irq number used is calculating by replacing the low two bits of the irq number (_irq_num10_)|
||with the low two bits of the sum (_irq_num10_+_sm_num10_) where_sm_num10_is the state machine|
||number|
|_irq_|Means set the IRQ without waiting|
|_irq set_|Also means set the IRQ without waiting|
|_irq nowait_|Again, means set the IRQ without waiting|
|_irq wait_|Means set the IRQ and wait for it to be cleared before proceeding|
|_irq clear_|Means clear the IRQ|



## **3.4.10. SET**

## **3.4.10.1. Encoding**

|**Bit:**|**15**|**14**|**13**|**12**|**11**|**10**|**9**|**8**|**7**|**6**|**5**|**4**|**3**|**2**|**1**|**0**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|SET|1|1|1|Delay/side-set|||||Destination|||Data|||||



3.4. Instruction Set

**330**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **3.4.10.2. Operation**

Write immediate value Data to Destination.

- [Destination:]

   - [000: ][PINS]

   - [001: ][X][ (scratch register X) 5 LSBs are set to ][Data][, all others cleared to 0.]

   - [010: ][Y][ (scratch register Y) 5 LSBs are set to ][Data][, all others cleared to 0.]

   - [011: Reserved]

   - [100: ][PINDIRS]

   - [101: Reserved]

   - [110: Reserved]

   - [111: Reserved]

- [Data: 5-bit immediate value to drive to pins or register.]

This can be used to assert control signals such as a clock or chip select, or to initialise loop counters. As Data is 5 bits in size, scratch registers can be SET to values from 0-31, which is sufficient for a 32-iteration loop.

The mapping of SET and OUT onto pins is configured independently. They may be mapped to distinct locations, for example if one pin is to be used as a clock signal, and another for data. They may also be overlapping ranges of pins: a UART transmitter might use SET to assert start and stop bits, and OUT instructions to shift out FIFO data to the same pins.

## **3.4.10.3. Assembler Syntax**

_set <destination>, <value>_

where:

_<destination>_ Is one of the destinations specified above. _<value>_ The value (see Section 3.3.2) to set (valid range 0-31)
