## **3.5. Functional Details**

## **3.5.1. Side-set**

Side-set is a feature that allows state machines to change the level or direction of up to 5 pins, concurrently with the main execution of the instruction.

One example where this is necessary is a fast SPI interface: here a clock transition (toggling 1→0 or 0→1) must be simultaneous with a data transition, where a new data bit is shifted from the OSR to a GPIO. In this case an OUT with a side-set would achieve both of these at once.

This makes the timing of the interface more precise, reduces the overall program size (as a separate SET instruction is not needed to toggle the clock pin), and also increases the maximum frequency the SPI can run at.

Side-set also makes GPIO mapping much more flexible, as its mapping is independent from SET. The example I2C code allows SDA and SCL to be mapped to any two arbitrary pins, if clock stretching is disabled. Normally, SCL toggles to synchronise data transfer, and SDA contains the data bits being shifted out. However, some particular I2C sequences such as Start and Stop line conditions, need a fixed pattern to be driven on SDA as well as SCL. The mapping I2C uses to achieve this is:

3.5. Functional Details

**331**

RP2040 Datasheet

- [Side-set ][→][ SCL]

- [OUT][→][ SDA]

- [SET][→][ SDA]

This lets the state machine serve the two use cases of data on SDA and clock on SCL, or fixed transitions on both SDA and SCL, while still allowing SDA and SCL to be mapped to any two GPIOs of choice.

The side-set data is encoded in the Delay/side-set field of each instruction. Any instruction can be combined with sideset, including instructions which write to the pins, such as OUT PINS or SET PINS. Side-set’s pin mapping is independent from OUT and SET mappings, though it may overlap. If side-set and an OUT or SET write to the same pin simultaneously, the side-set data is used.

##  **NOTE**

If an instruction stalls, the side-set still takes effect immediately.

1 .program spi_tx_fast 2 .side_set 1 3 4 loop: 5     out pins, 1  side 0 6     jmp loop     side 1

The spi_tx_fast example shows two benefits of this: data and clock transitions can be more precisely co-aligned, and programs can be made faster overall, with an output of one bit per two system clock cycles in this case. Programs can also be made smaller.

There are four things to configure when using side-set:

1. The number of MSBs of the Delay/side-set field to use for side-set rather than delay. This is configured by PINCTRL_SIDESET_COUNT. If this is set to 5, delay cycles are not available. If set to 0, no side-set will take place.

2. Whether to use the most significant of these bits as an enable. Side-set takes place on instructions where the enable is high. If there is no enable bit, **every** instruction on that state machine will perform a side-set, if SIDESET_COUNT is nonzero. This is configured by EXECCTRL_SIDE_EN.

3. The GPIO number to map the least-significant side-set bit to. Configured by PINCTRL_SIDESET_BASE.

4. Whether side-set writes to GPIO levels or GPIO directions. Configured by EXECCTRL_SIDE_PINDIR

In the above example, we have only one side-set data bit, and every instruction performs a side-set, so no enable bit is required. SIDESET_COUNT would be 1, SIDE_EN would be false. SIDE_PINDIR would also be false, as we want to drive the clock high and low, not high- and low-impedance. SIDESET_BASE would select the GPIO the clock is driven from.

## **3.5.2. Program Wrapping**

PIO programs often have an "outer loop": they perform the same sequence of steps, repetitively, as they transfer a stream of data between the FIFOs and the outside world. The square wave program from the introduction is a minimal example of this:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave.pio Lines 8 - 13_

8 .program squarewave 9     set pindirs, 1   ; Set pin to output 10 again: 11     set pins, 1 [1]  ; Drive pin high and then delay for one cycle 12     set pins, 0      ; Drive pin low

3.5. Functional Details

**332**

RP2040 Datasheet

## 13     jmp again        ; Set PC to label `again`

The main body of the program drives a pin high, and then low, producing one period of a square wave. The entire program then loops, driving a periodic output. The jump itself takes one cycle, as does each set instruction, so to keep the high and low periods of the same duration, the set pins, 1 has a single delay cycle added, which makes the state machine idle for one cycle before executing the set pins, 0 instruction. In total, each loop takes four cycles. There are two frustrations here:

- [The ][JMP][ takes up space in the instruction memory that could be used for other programs]

- [The extra cycle taken to execute the ][JMP][ ends up ] _[halving]_[ the maximum output rate]

As the Program Counter (PC) naturally wraps to 0 when incremented past 31, we could solve the second of these by filling the entire instruction memory with a repeating pattern of set pins, 1 and set pins, 0, but this is wasteful. State machines have a hardware feature, configured via their EXECCTRL control register, which solves this common case.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave_wrap.pio Lines 12 - 20_

12 .program squarewave_wrap 13 ; Like squarewave, but use the state machine's .wrap hardware instead of an 14 ; explicit jmp. This is a free (0-cycle) unconditional jump. 15 16     set pindirs, 1   ; Set pin to output 17 .wrap_target 18     set pins, 1 [1]  ; Drive pin high and then delay for one cycle 19     set pins, 0 [1]  ; Drive pin low and then delay for one cycle 20 .wrap

After executing an instruction from the program memory, state machines use the following logic to update PC:

1. If the current instruction is a JMP, and the Condition is true, set PC to the Target

2. Otherwise, if PC matches EXECCTRL_WRAP_TOP, set PC to EXECCTRL_WRAP_BOTTOM

3. Otherwise, increment PC, or set to 0 if the current value is 31.

The .wrap_target and .wrap assembly directives in pioasm are essentially labels. They export constants which can be written to the WRAP_BOTTOM and WRAP_TOP control fields, respectively:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/generated/squarewave_wrap.pio.h_

1 _// -------------------------------------------------- //_ 2 _// This file is autogenerated by pioasm; do not edit! //_ 3 _// -------------------------------------------------- //_ 4 5 _#pragma once_ 6 7 _#include "hardware/pio.h"_ 8 9 _// --------------- //_ 10 _// squarewave_wrap //_ 11 _// --------------- //_ 12 13 _#define squarewave_wrap_wrap_target 1_ 14 _#define squarewave_wrap_wrap 2_ 15 _#define squarewave_wrap_pio_version 0_ 16 17 static const uint16_t squarewave_wrap_program_instructions[] = { 18     0xe081, _//  0: set    pindirs, 1_ 19 _//     .wrap_target_ 20     0xe101, _//  1: set    pins, 1                [1]_ 21     0xe100, _//  2: set    pins, 0                [1]_

3.5. Functional Details

**333**

RP2040 Datasheet

22 _//     .wrap_ 23 }; 24 25 static const struct pio_program squarewave_wrap_program = { 26     .instructions = squarewave_wrap_program_instructions, 27     .length = 3, 28     .origin = -1, 29     .pio_version = squarewave_wrap_pio_version, 30     .used_gpio_ranges = 0x0 31 _#endif_ 32 }; 33 34 static inline pio_sm_config squarewave_wrap_program_get_default_config(uint offset) { 35     pio_sm_config c = pio_get_default_sm_config(); 36     sm_config_set_wrap(&c, offset + squarewave_wrap_wrap_target, offset + squarewave_wrap_wrap); 37     return c; 38 }

This is raw output from the PIO assembler, pioasm, which has created a default pio_sm_config object containing the WRAP register values from the program listing. The control register fields could also be initialised directly.

##  **NOTE**

WRAP_BOTTOM and WRAP_TOP are absolute addresses in the PIO instruction memory. If a program is loaded at an offset, the wrap addresses must be adjusted accordingly.

The squarewave_wrap example has delay cycles inserted, so that it behaves identically to the original squarewave program. Thanks to program wrapping, these can now be removed, so that the output toggles twice as fast, while maintaining an even balance of high and low periods.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/squarewave/squarewave_fast.pio Lines 12 - 18_

12 .program squarewave_fast 13 ; Like squarewave_wrap, but remove the delay cycles so we can run twice as fast. 14     set pindirs, 1   ; Set pin to output 15 .wrap_target 16     set pins, 1      ; Drive pin high 17     set pins, 0      ; Drive pin low 18 .wrap

## **3.5.3. FIFO Joining**

By default, each state machine possesses a 4-entry FIFO in each direction: one for data transfer from system to state machine (TX), the other for the reverse direction (RX). However, many applications do not require bidirectional data transfer between the system and an individual state machine, but may benefit from deeper FIFOs: in particular, highbandwidth interfaces such as DPI. For these cases, SHIFTCTRL_FJOIN can merge the two 4-entry FIFOs into a single 8-entry FIFO.

3.5. Functional Details

**334**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 42. Joinable dual FIFO. A pair of four-entry FIFOs, implemented with four data registers, a 1:4 decoder and a 4:1 multiplexer. Additional multiplexing allows write data and read data to cross between the TX and RX lanes, so that all 8 entries are accessible from both ports_

**==> picture [298 x 195] intentionally omitted <==**

Another example is a UART: because the TX/CTS and RX/RTS parts a of a UART are asynchronous, they are implemented on two separate state machines. It would be wasteful to leave half of each state machine’s FIFO resources idle. The ability to join the two halves into just a TX FIFO for the TX/CTS state machine, or just an RX FIFO in the case of the RX/RTS state machine, allows full utilisation. A UART equipped with an 8-deep FIFO can be left alone for twice as long between interrupts as one with only a 4-deep FIFO.

When one FIFO is increased in size (from 4 to 8), the other FIFO on that state machine is reduced to zero. For example, if joining to TX, the RX FIFO is unavailable, and any PUSH instruction will stall. The RX FIFO will appear both RXFULL and RXEMPTY in the FSTAT register. The converse is true if joining to RX: the TX FIFO is unavailable, and the TXFULL and TXEMPTY bits for this state machine will both be set in FSTAT. Setting both FJOIN_RX and FJOIN_TX makes both FIFOs unavailable.

8 FIFO entries is sufficient for 1 word per clock through the RP2040 system DMA, provided the DMA is not slowed by contention with other masters.

##  **CAUTION**

Changing FJOIN discards any data present in the state machine’s FIFOs. If this data is irreplaceable, it must be drained beforehand.

## **3.5.4. Autopush and Autopull**

With each OUT instruction, the OSR gradually empties, as data is shifted out. Once empty, it must be refilled: for example, a PULL transfers one word of data from the TX FIFO to the OSR. Similarly, the ISR must be emptied once full. One approach to this is a loop which performs a PULL after an appropriate amount of data has been shifted:

1 .program manual_pull 2 .side_set 1 opt 3 4 .wrap_target 5     set x, 2                   ; X = bit count - 2 6     pull            side 1 [1]  ; Stall here if no TX data 7 bitloop: 8     out pins, 1     side 0 [1]  ; Shift out data bit and toggle clock low 9     jmp x-- bitloop side 1 [1]  ; Loop runs 3 times 10     out pins, 1     side 0      ; Shift out last bit before reloading X 11 .wrap

This program shifts out 4 bits from each FIFO word, with an accompanying bit clock, at a constant rate of 1 bit per 4 cycles. When the TX FIFO is empty, it stalls with the clock high (noting that side-set still takes place on cycles where the

3.5. Functional Details

**335**

RP2040 Datasheet

instruction stalls). Figure 43 shows how a state machine would execute this program.

_Figure 43. Execution of manual_pullprogram. X is used as_ System ClockInstructionScratch X SET PULL 2 OUT JMP OUT1 JMP OUT0 JMP OUT-1 SET PULL2 _a loop counter. On_ Data pin (OUT) Bit 0 Bit 1 Bit 2 Bit 3 _each iteration, one_ Clock pin (side -set) _data bit is shifted out, and the clock is_ OSR shift count 32 0 1 2 3 4 _asserted low, then high. A delay cycle on each instruction_ This program has some limitations: _brings the total up to four cycles per_ • It occupies 5 instruction slots, but only 2 of these are immediately useful (out pins, 1 set 0 and … set 1), for _iteration. After the third loop, a fourth bit_ outputting serial data and a clock. _is shifted out, and the state machine_ •[Its throughput is limited to system clock over 4, due to the extra cycles required to pull in new data, and reload the] _immediately returns to_ loop counter _the start of the program to reload the_ This is a common type of problem for PIO, so each state machine has some extra hardware to handle it. State machines _loop counter and pull_ keep track of the total shift count OUT of the OSR and IN to the ISR, and trigger certain actions once these counters reach _fresh data, while maintaining the 4_ a programmable threshold. _cycles/bit cadence._

- [On an ][OUT][ instruction which reaches or exceeds the pull threshold, the state machine can simultaneously refill the] OSR from the TX FIFO, if data is available.

- [On an ][IN][ instruction which reaches or exceeds the push threshold, the state machine can write the shift result] directly to the RX FIFO, and clear the ISR.

The manual_pull example can be rewritten to take advantage of automatic pull (autopull):

1 .program autopull 2 .side_set 1 3 4 .wrap_target 5     out pins, 1   side 0    [1] 6     nop           side 1    [1] 7 .wrap

This is shorter and simpler than the original, and can run _twice_ as fast, if the delay cycles are removed, since the hardware refills the OSR "for free". Note that the program does not determine the total number of bits to be shifted before the next pull; the hardware automatically pulls once the programmable threshold, SHIFCTRL_PULL_THRESH, is reached, so the same program could also shift out e.g. 16 or 32 bits from each FIFO word.

Finally, note that the above program is not _exactly_ the same as the original, since it stalls with the clock output low, rather than high. We can change the location of the stall, using the PULL IFEMPTY instruction, which uses the same configurable threshold as autopull:

1 .program somewhat_manual_pull 2 .side_set 1 3 4 .wrap_target 5     out pins, 1   side 0    [1] 6     pull ifempty  side 1    [1] 7 .wrap

Below is a complete example (PIO program, plus a C program to load and run it) which illustrates autopull and autopush both enabled on the same state machine. It programs state machine 0 to loopback data from the TX FIFO to the RX FIFO, with a throughput of one word per two clocks. It also demonstrates how the state machine will stall if it tries to OUT when both the OSR and TX FIFO are empty.

3.5. Functional Details

**336**

RP2040 Datasheet

1 .program auto_push_pull 2 3 .wrap_target 4     out x, 32 5     in x, 32 6 .wrap

1 _#include "tb.h" // TODO this is built against existing sw tree, so that we get printf etc_ 2 3 _#include "platform.h"_ 4 _#include "pio_regs.h"_ 5 _#include "system.h"_ 6 _#include "hardware.h"_ 7 8 _#include "auto_push_pull.pio.h"_ 9 10 int main() 11 { 12     tb_init(); 13 14 _// Load program and configure state machine 0 for autopush/pull with_ 15 _// threshold of 32, and wrapping on program boundary. A threshold of 32 is_ 16 _// encoded by a register value of 00000._ 17     for (int i = 0; i < count_of(auto_push_pull_program); ++i) 18         mm_pio->instr_mem[i] = auto_push_pull_program[i]; 19     mm_pio->sm[0].shiftctrl = 20         (1u << PIO_SM0_SHIFTCTRL_AUTOPUSH_LSB) | 21         (1u << PIO_SM0_SHIFTCTRL_AUTOPULL_LSB) | 22         (0u << PIO_SM0_SHIFTCTRL_PUSH_THRESH_LSB) | 23         (0u << PIO_SM0_SHIFTCTRL_PULL_THRESH_LSB); 24     mm_pio->sm[0].execctrl = 25         (auto_push_pull_wrap_target << PIO_SM0_EXECCTRL_WRAP_BOTTOM_LSB) | 26         (auto_push_pull_wrap << PIO_SM0_EXECCTRL_WRAP_TOP_LSB); 27 28 _// Start state machine 0_ 29     hw_set_bits(&mm_pio->ctrl, 1u << (PIO_CTRL_SM_ENABLE_LSB + 0)); 30 31 _// Push data into TX FIFO, and pop from RX FIFO_ 32     for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i) 33         mm_pio->txf[0] = i; 34     for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i) 35         printf("%d\n", mm_pio->rxf[0]); 36 37     return 0; 38 }

Figure 44 shows how the state machine executes the example program. Initially the OSR is empty, so the state machine stalls on the first OUT instruction. Once data is available in the TX FIFO, the state machine transfers this into the OSR. On the next cycle, the OUT can execute using the data in the OSR (in this case, transferring this data to the X scratch register), and the state machine simultaneously refills the OSR with fresh data from the FIFO. Since every IN instruction immediately fills the ISR, the ISR remains empty, and IN transfers data directly from scratch X to the RX FIFO.

3.5. Functional Details

**337**

RP2040 Datasheet

|_Figure 44. Execution_<br>_of auto_push_pull_<br>_program. The state_|clock<br>Current Instruction|||OUT|OUT|||IN||OUT||IN||OUT||IN||OUT||IN||OUT||IN||||OUT|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_machine stalls on an_|Stall||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|_OUT until data has_|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|_travelled through the_<br>_TX FIFO into the OSR._<br>_Subsequently, the OSR_|TX FIFO Empty<br>TX FIFO Pop<br>OSR Count (0=full)||32||||0||0||||0||||0||||0|||||32|||||
|_is refilled_|RX FIFO Push||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
|_simultaneously with_|ISR Count (0=empty)|||||0|||||0||||0||||0||||0|||||0|||
|_each OUT operation_|RX FIFO Push||||||||1||||2||||3||||4||||5||||||
|_(due to bit count of_|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||



_32), and IN data_

> _bypasses the ISR and_ To trigger automatic push or pull at the correct time, the state machine tracks the total shift count of the ISR and OSR,

> _goes straight to the RX_ using a pair of saturating 6-bit counters. _FIFO. The state_

> _machine stalls again_ •[At reset, or upon ][CTRL_SM_RESTART][ assertion, ISR shift counter is set to 0 (nothing shifted in), and OSR to 32 (nothing] _when the FIFO has drained, and the OSR_ left to be shifted out) _is once again empty._

- [An ][OUT][ instruction increases the OSR shift counter by ][Bit count]

- [An ][IN][ instruction increases the ISR shift counter by ][Bit count]

- [A ][PULL][ instruction or autopull clears the OSR counter to 0]

- [A ][PUSH][ instruction or autopush clears the ISR counter to 0]

- [A ][MOV OSR, x][ or ][MOV ISR, x][ clears the OSR or ISR shift counter to 0, respectively]

- [A ][OUT ISR, n][ instruction sets the ISR shift counter to ][n]

On any OUT or IN instruction, the state machine compares the shift counters to the values of SHIFTCTRL_PULL_THRESH and SHIFTCTRL_PUSH_THRESH to decide whether action is required. Autopull and autopush are individually enabled by the SHIFTCTRL_AUTOPULL and SHIFTCTRL_AUTOPUSH fields.

## **3.5.4.1. Autopush Details**

Pseudocode for an 'IN' with autopush enabled:

1 isr = shift_in(isr, input()) 2 isr count = saturate(isr count + in count) 3 4 if rx count >= threshold: 5     if rx fifo is full: 6         stall 7     else: 8         push(isr) 9         isr = 0 10         isr count = 0

Note that the hardware performs the above steps in a single machine clock cycle (unless there is a stall).

Threshold is configurable from 1 to 32.

## **3.5.4.2. Autopull Details**

On non-'OUT' cycles, the hardware performs the equivalent of the following pseudocode:

3.5. Functional Details

**338**

RP2040 Datasheet

1 if MOV or PULL: 2     osr count = 0 3 4 if osr count >= threshold: 5     if tx fifo not empty: 6         osr = pull() 7         osr count = 0

An autopull can therefore occur at any point between two 'OUT' s, depending on when the data arrives in the FIFO.

On 'OUT' cycles, the sequence is a little different:

1 if osr count >= threshold: 2     if tx fifo not empty: 3         osr = pull() 4         osr count = 0 5     stall 6 else: 7     output(osr) 8     osr = shift(osr, out count) 9     osr count = saturate(osr count + out count) 10 11     if osr count >= threshold: 12         if tx fifo not empty: 13             osr = pull() 14             osr count = 0

The hardware is capable of refilling the OSR simultaneously with shifting out the last of the shift data, as these two operations can proceed in parallel. However, it cannot fill an empty OSR and 'OUT' it on the same cycle, due to the long logic path this would create.

The refill is somewhat asynchronous to your program, but an 'OUT' behaves as a data fence, and the state machine will never 'OUT' data which you didn’t write into the FIFO.

Note that a 'MOV' from the OSR is undefined whilst autopull is enabled; you will read either any residual data that has not been shifted out, or a fresh word from the FIFO, depending on a race against system DMA. Likewise, a 'MOV' to the OSR may overwrite data which has just been autopulled. However, data which you 'MOV' into the OSR will never be overwritten, since 'MOV' updates the shift counter.

If you **do** need to read the OSR contents, you should perform an explicit 'PULL' of some kind. The nondeterminism described above is the cost of the hardware managing pulls automatically. When autopull is enabled, the behaviour of 'PULL' is altered: it becomes a no-op if the OSR is full. This is to avoid a race condition against the system DMA. It behaves as a fence: either an autopull has already taken place, in which case the 'PULL' has no effect, or the program will stall on the 'PULL' until data becomes available in the FIFO.

'PUSH' does not need a similar behaviour, because autopush does not have the same nondeterminism.

## **3.5.5. Clock Dividers**

PIO runs off the system clock, but this is simply too fast for many interfaces, and the number of Delay cycles which can be inserted is limited. Some devices, such as UART, require the signalling rate to be precisely controlled and varied, and ideally multiple state machines can be varied independently while running identical programs. Each state machine is equipped with a clock divider, for this purpose.

Rather than slowing the system clock itself, the clock divider redefines how many system clock periods are considered to be "one cycle", for execution purposes. It does this by generating a clock enable signal, which can pause and resume execution on a per-system-clock-cycle basis. The clock divider generates clock enable pulses at regular intervals, so

3.5. Functional Details

**339**

RP2040 Datasheet

that the state machine runs at some steady pace, potentially much slower than the system clock.

Implementing the clock dividers in this way allows interfacing between the state machines and the system to be simpler, lower-latency, and with a smaller footprint. The state machine is completely idle on cycles where clock enable is low, though the system can still access the state machine’s FIFOs and change its configuration.

The clock dividers are 16-bit integer, 8-bit fractional, with first-order delta-sigma for the fractional divider. The clock divisor can vary between 1 and 65536, in increments of .

If the clock divisor is set to 1, the state machine runs on every cycle, i.e. full speed:

_Figure 45. State machine operationwith a clock divisor of_ System ClockCLKDIV_INT 1 _1. Once the state_ CLKDIV_FRAC .0 CTRL_SM_ENABLE _machine is enabled via_ Clock Enable _the CTRL register, its clock enable is asserted on every_ In general, an integer clock divisor of _n_ will cause the state machine to run 1 cycle in every _n_ , giving an effective clock _cycle._ speed of .

_Figure 46. Integer clock divisors yield a periodic clock enable. The clock divider repeatedly counts down from n, and emits an enable pulse when it reaches 1._

System Clock CLKDIV_INT 2 CLKDIV_FRAC .0 CTRL_SM_ENABLE Clock Enable

Fractional division will maintain a steady state division rate of , where _n_ and _f_ are the integer and fractional fields of this state machine’s CLKDIV register. It does this by selectively extending some division periods from cycles to

**==> picture [18 x 7] intentionally omitted <==**

.

_Figure 47. Fractional clock division with an_ System Clock _average divisor of 2.5._ CLKDIV_INT _The clock divider_ CLKDIV_FRAC CTRL_SM_ENABLE _maintains a running_ Clock Enable _total of the fractional value from each division period, and_ For small _every time this value wraps through 1, the integer divisor is increased by one for_  **NOTE** _the next division period._

System Clock CLKDIV_INT 2 CLKDIV_FRAC .5 CTRL_SM_ENABLE Clock Enable

For small _n_ , the jitter introduced by a fractional divider may be unacceptable. However, for larger values, this effect is much less apparent.

For fast asynchronous serial, it is recommended to use even divisions or multiples of 1 Mbaud where possible, rather than the traditional multiples of 300, to avoid unnecessary jitter.

## **3.5.6. GPIO Mapping**

Internally, PIO has a 32-bit register for the output levels of each GPIO it can drive, and another register for the output enables (Hi/Lo-Z). On every system clock cycle, each state machine can write to some or all of the GPIOs in each of these registers.

3.5. Functional Details

**340**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 48. The state machine has two independent output channels, one shared by OUT/SET, and another used by sideset (which can happen at any time). Three independent mappings (first GPIO, number of GPIOs) control which GPIOs OUT, SET and side-set are directed to. Input data is rotated according to which GPIO is mapped to the LSB of the IN data._

**==> picture [293 x 159] intentionally omitted <==**

The write data and write masks for the output level and output enable registers come from the following sources:

- [An ][OUT][ instruction writes to up to 32 bits. Depending on the instruction’s ][Destination][ field, this is applied to either] pins or pindirs. The least-significant bit of OUT data is mapped to PINCTRL_OUT_BASE, and this mapping continues for PINCTRL_OUT_COUNT bits, wrapping after GPIO31.

- [A ][SET][ instruction writes up to 5 bits. Depending on the instruction’s ][Destination][ field, this is applied to either pins or] pindirs. The least-significant bit of SET data is mapped to PINCTRL_SET_BASE, and this mapping continues for PINCTRL_SET_COUNT bits, wrapping after GPIO31.

- [A side-set operation writes up to 5 bits. Depending on the register field ][EXECCTRL_SIDE_PINDIR][, this is applied to either] pins or pindirs. The least-significant bit of side-set data is mapped to PINCTRL_SIDESET_BASE, continuing for PINCTRL_SIDESET_COUNT pins, minus one if EXECCTRL_SIDE_EN is set.

Each OUT/SET/side-set operation writes to a contiguous range of pins, but each of these ranges is independently sized and positioned in the 32-bit GPIO space. This is sufficiently flexible for many applications. For example, if one state machine is implementing some interface such as an SPI on a group of pins, another state machine can run the same program, mapped to a different group of pins, and provide a second SPI interface.

On any given clock cycle, the state machine may perform an OUT or a SET, and may simultaneously perform a side-set. The pin mapping logic generates a 32-bit write mask and write data bus for the output level and output enable registers, based on this request, and the pin mapping configuration.

If a side-set overlaps with an OUT/SET performed by that state machine on the same cycle, the side-set takes precedence in the overlapping region.

## **3.5.6.1. Output Priority**

_Figure 49. Per-GPIO priority select of write masks from each state machine. Each GPIO considers level and direction writes from each of the four state machines, and applies the value from the highest-numbered state machine._

**==> picture [270 x 133] intentionally omitted <==**

Each state machine may assert an OUT/SET and a side-set through its pin mapping hardware on each cycle. This generates 32 bits of write data and write mask for the GPIO output level and output enable registers, from each state machine.

For each GPIO, PIO collates the writes from all four state machines, and applies the write from the highest-numbered

3.5. Functional Details

**341**

RP2040 Datasheet

state machine. This occurs separately for output levels and output directions — it is possible for a state machine to change both the level and direction of the same pin on the same cycle (e.g. via simultaneous SET and side-set), or for one state machine to change a GPIO’s direction while another changes that GPIO’s level. If no state machine asserts a write to a GPIO’s level or direction, the value does not change.

There is a register stage between each state machine and the pin mapping logic, and a register stage between the input mapping logic and each state machine. Assuming zero propagation delay, a state machine observing its own outputs is subject to the following delays:

- [when bypassing synchronisers, a two-cycle delay]

- [when synchronisers are engaged, a four-cycle delay]

## **3.5.6.2. Input Mapping**

The data observed by IN instructions is mapped such that the LSB is the GPIO selected by PINCTRL_IN_BASE, and successively more-significant bits come from successively higher-numbered GPIOs, wrapping after 31.

In other words, the IN bus is a right-rotate of the GPIO input values, by PINCTRL_IN_BASE. If fewer than 32 GPIOs are present, the PIO input is padded with zeroes up to 32 bits.

Some instructions, such as WAIT GPIO, use an absolute GPIO number, rather than an index into the IN data bus. In this case, the right-rotate is not applied.

## **3.5.6.3. Input Synchronisers**

To protect PIO from metastabilities, each GPIO input is equipped with a standard 2-flipflop synchroniser. This adds two cycles of latency to input sampling, but the benefit is that state machines can perform an IN PINS at any point, and will see only a clean high or low level, not some intermediate value that could disturb the state machine circuitry. This is absolutely necessary for asynchronous interfaces such as UART RX.

It is possible to bypass these synchronisers, on a per-GPIO basis. This reduces input latency, but it is then up to the user to guarantee that the state machine does not sample its inputs at inappropriate times. Generally this is only possible for synchronous interfaces such as SPI. Synchronisers are bypassed by setting the corresponding bit in INPUT_SYNC_BYPASS.

##  **WARNING**

Sampling a metastable input can lead to unpredictable state machine behaviour. This should be avoided. Do not disable the synchronizers unless data applied to the pins meets setup and hold times relative to CLK_SYS.

## **3.5.7. Forced and EXEC’d Instructions**

Besides the instruction memory, state machines can execute instructions from 3 other sources:

- [MOV EXEC][ which executes an instruction from some register ][Source]

- [OUT EXEC][ which executes data shifted out from the OSR]

- [The ][SMx_INSTR][ control registers, to which the system can write instructions for immediate execution]

1 .program exec_example 2 3 hang: 4     jmp hang 5 execute: 6     out exec, 32 7     jmp execute 8

3.5. Functional Details

**342**

RP2040 Datasheet

9 .program instructions_to_push 10 11     out x, 32 12     in x, 32 13     push

1 _#include "tb.h" // TODO this is built against existing sw tree, so that we get printf etc_ 2 3 _#include "platform.h"_ 4 _#include "pio_regs.h"_ 5 _#include "system.h"_ 6 _#include "hardware.h"_ 7 8 _#include "exec_example.pio.h"_ 9 10 int main() 11 { 12     tb_init(); 13 14     for (int i = 0; i < count_of(exec_example_program); ++i) 15         mm_pio->instr_mem[i] = exec_example_program[i]; 16 17 _// Enable autopull, threshold of 32_ 18     mm_pio->sm[0].shiftctrl = (1u << PIO_SM0_SHIFTCTRL_AUTOPULL_LSB); 19 20 _// Start state machine 0 -- will sit in "hang" loop_ 21     hw_set_bits(&mm_pio->ctrl, 1u << (PIO_CTRL_SM_ENABLE_LSB + 0)); 22 23 _// Force a jump to program location 1_ 24     mm_pio->sm[0].instr = 0x0000 | 0x1; _// jmp execute_ 25 26 _// Feed a mixture of instructions and data into FIFO_ 27     mm_pio->txf[0] = instructions_to_push_program[0]; _// out x, 32_ 28     mm_pio->txf[0] = 12345678; _// data to be OUTed_ 29     mm_pio->txf[0] = instructions_to_push_program[1]; _// in x, 32_ 30     mm_pio->txf[0] = instructions_to_push_program[2]; _// push_ 31 32 _// The program pushed into TX FIFO will return some data in RX FIFO_ 33     while (mm_pio->fstat & (1u << PIO_FSTAT_RXEMPTY_LSB)) 34         ; 35 36     printf("%d\n", mm_pio->rxf[0]); 37 38     return 0; 39 }

Here we load an example program into the state machine, which does two things:

- [Enters an infinite loop]

- [Enters a loop which repeatedly pulls 32 bits of data from the TX FIFO, and executes the lower 16 bits as an] instruction

The C program sets the state machine running, at which point it enters the hang loop. While the state machine is still running, the C program forces in a jmp instruction, which causes the state machine to break out of the loop.

When an instruction is written to the INSTR register, the state machine immediately decodes and executes that instruction, rather than the instruction it would have fetched from the PIO’s instruction memory. The program counter does not advance, so on the next cycle (assuming the instruction forced into the INSTR interface did not stall) the state machine continues to execute its current program from the point where it left off, unless the written instruction itself

3.5. Functional Details

**343**

RP2040 Datasheet

## manipulated PC.

Delay cycles are ignored on instructions written to the INSTR register, and execute immediately, ignoring the state machine clock divider. This interface is provided for performing initial setup and effecting control flow changes, so it executes instructions in a timely manner, no matter how the state machine is configured.

Instructions written to the INSTR register are permitted to stall, in which case the state machine will latch this instruction internally until it completes. This is signified by the EXECCTRL_EXEC_STALLED flag. This can be cleared by restarting the state machine, or writing a NOP to INSTR.

In the second phase of the example state machine program, the OUT EXEC instruction is used. The OUT itself occupies one execution cycle, and the instruction which the OUT executes is on the next execution cycle. Note that one of the instructions we execute is also an OUT — the state machine is only capable of executing one OUT instruction on any given cycle.

OUT EXEC works by writing the OUT shift data to an internal instruction latch. On the next cycle, the state machine remembers it must execute from this latch rather than the instruction memory, and also knows to not advance PC on this second cycle.

This program will print "12345678" when run.

##  **CAUTION**

If an instruction written to INSTR stalls, it is stored in the same instruction latch used by OUT EXEC and MOV EXEC, and will overwrite an in-progress instruction there. If EXEC instructions are used, instructions written to INSTR must not stall.
