## **3.6. Examples**

These examples illustrate some of PIO’s hardware features, by implementing common I/O interfaces.

## **Looking to get started?**

The **Raspberry Pi Pico-series C/C++ SDK** book has a comprehensive PIO chapter, which walks through writing and building a first PIO application, and goes on to walk through some programs line-by-line. It also covers broader topics such as using PIO with DMA, and goes into much more depth on how PIO can be integrated into your software.

## **3.6.1. Duplex SPI**

3.6. Examples

**344**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 50. In SPI, a host and device exchange data over a bidirectional pair of serial data lines, synchronous with a clock (SCK). Two flags, CPOL and CPHA, specify the clock’s behaviour. CPOL is the idle state of the clock: 0 for low,_ SPI is a common serial interface with a twisty history. The following program implements full-duplex (i.e. transferring _1 for high. The clock_ data in both directions simultaneously) SPI, with a CPHA parameter of 0. _pulses a number of times, transferring one bit in each direction Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/spi/spi.pio Lines 14 - 32 per pulse, but always returns to its idle state. CPHA_ 14 .program spi_cpha0 _determines on which_ 15 .side_set 1 _edge of the clock data_ 16 _is captured: 0 for_ 17 ; Pin assignments: _leading edge, and 1 for_ 18 ; - SCK is side-set pin 0 _trailing edge. The_ 19 ; - MOSI is OUT pin 0 _arrows in the figure show the clock edge_ 20 ; - MISO is IN pin 0 _where data is captured_ 21 ; _by both the host and_ 22 ; Autopush and autopull must be enabled, and the serial frame size is set by _device._

14 .program spi_cpha0 15 .side_set 1 16 17 ; Pin assignments: 18 ; - SCK is side-set pin 0 19 ; - MOSI is OUT pin 0 20 ; - MISO is IN pin 0 21 ; 22 ; Autopush and autopull must be enabled, and the serial frame size is set by 23 ; configuring the push/pull threshold. Shift left/right is fine, but you must 24 ; justify the data yourself. This is done most conveniently for frame sizes of 25 ; 8 or 16 bits by using the narrow store replication and narrow load byte 26 ; picking behaviour of RP2040's IO fabric. 27 28 ; Clock phase = 0: data is captured on the leading edge of each SCK pulse, and 29 ; transitions on the trailing edge, or some time before the first leading edge. 30 31     out pins, 1 side 0 [1] ; Stall here on empty (sideset proceeds even if 32     in pins, 1  side 1 [1] ; instruction stalls, so we stall with SCK low)

This code uses autopush and autopull to continuously stream data from the FIFOs. The entire program runs once for every bit that is transferred, and then loops. The state machine tracks how many bits have been shifted in/out, and automatically pushes/pulls the FIFOs at the correct point. A similar program handles the CPHA=1 case:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/spi/spi.pio Lines 34 - 42_

34 .program spi_cpha1 35 .side_set 1 36 37 ; Clock phase = 1: data transitions on the leading edge of each SCK pulse, and 38 ; is captured on the trailing edge. 39 40     out x, 1    side 0     ; Stall here on empty (keep SCK deasserted) 41     mov pins, x side 1 [1] ; Output data, assert SCK (mov pins uses OUT mapping) 42     in pins, 1  side 0     ; Input data, deassert SCK

3.6. Examples

**345**

RP2040 Datasheet

##  **NOTE**

These programs do not control the chip select line; chip select is often implemented as a software-controlled GPIO, due to wildly different behaviour between different SPI hardware. The full spi.pio source linked above contains some examples how PIO can implement a hardware chip select line.

A C helper function configures the state machine, connects the GPIOs, and sets the state machine running. Note that the SPI frame size — that is, the number of bits transferred for each FIFO record — can be programmed to any value from 1 to 32, without modifying the program. Once configured, the state machine is set running.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/spi/spi.pio Lines 46 - 72_

46 static inline void pio_spi_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint prog_offs, uint n_bits, 47         float clkdiv, bool cpha, bool cpol, uint pin_sck, uint pin_mosi, uint pin_miso) { 48     pio_sm_config c = cpha ? spi_cpha1_program_get_default_config(prog_offs) : spi_cpha0_program_get_default_config(prog_offs);

49     sm_config_set_out_pins(&c, pin_mosi, 1); 50     sm_config_set_in_pins(&c, pin_miso); 51     sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin_sck); 52 _// Only support MSB-first in this example code (shift to left, auto push/pull, threshold=nbits)_ 53     sm_config_set_out_shift(&c, false, true, n_bits); 54     sm_config_set_in_shift(&c, false, true, n_bits); 55     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, clkdiv); 56 57 _// MOSI, SCK output are low, MISO is input_ 58     pio_sm_set_pins_with_mask(pio, sm, 0, (1u << pin_sck) | (1u << pin_mosi)); 59     pio_sm_set_pindirs_with_mask(pio, sm, (1u << pin_sck) | (1u << pin_mosi), (1u << pin_sck) | (1u << pin_mosi) | (1u << pin_miso)); 60     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin_mosi); 61     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin_miso); 62     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin_sck); 63 64 _// The pin muxes can be configured to invert the output (among other things_ 65 _// and this is a cheesy way to get CPOL=1_ 66     gpio_set_outover(pin_sck, cpol ? GPIO_OVERRIDE_INVERT : GPIO_OVERRIDE_NORMAL); 67 _// SPI is synchronous, so bypass input synchroniser to reduce input delay._ 68     hw_set_bits(&pio->input_sync_bypass, 1u << pin_miso); 69 70     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, prog_offs, &c); 71     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 72 }

The state machine will now immediately begin to shift out any data appearing in the TX FIFO, and push received data into the RX FIFO.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/spi/pio_spi.c Lines 18 - 34_

18 void __time_critical_func(pio_spi_write8_blocking)(const pio_spi_inst_t *spi, const uint8_t *src, size_t len) { 19     size_t tx_remain = len, rx_remain = len; 20 _// Do 8 bit accesses on FIFO, so that write data is byte-replicated. This_ 21 _// gets us the left-justification for free (for MSB-first shift-out)_ 22     io_rw_8 *txfifo = (io_rw_8 *) &spi->pio->txf[spi->sm]; 23     io_rw_8 *rxfifo = (io_rw_8 *) &spi->pio->rxf[spi->sm]; 24     while (tx_remain || rx_remain) { 25         if (tx_remain && !pio_sm_is_tx_fifo_full(spi->pio, spi->sm)) { 26             *txfifo = *src++; 27             --tx_remain; 28         }

3.6. Examples

**346**

RP2040 Datasheet

29         if (rx_remain && !pio_sm_is_rx_fifo_empty(spi->pio, spi->sm)) { 30             (void) *rxfifo; 31             --rx_remain; 32         } 33     } 34 }

Putting this all together, this complete C program will loop back some data through a PIO SPI at 1MHz, with all four CPOL/CPHA combinations:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/spi/spi_loopback.c_

1 _/**_ 2 _* Copyright (c) 2020 Raspberry Pi (Trading) Ltd._ 3 _*_ 4 _* SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause_ 5 _*/_ 6 7 _#include <stdlib.h>_ 8 _#include <stdio.h>_ 9 10 _#include "pico/stdlib.h"_ 11 _#include "pio_spi.h"_ 12 13 _// This program instantiates a PIO SPI with each of the four possible_ 14 _// CPOL/CPHA combinations, with the serial input and output pin mapped to the_ 15 _// same GPIO. Any data written into the state machine's TX FIFO should then be_ 16 _// serialised, deserialised, and reappear in the state machine's RX FIFO._ 17 18 _#define PIN_SCK 18_ 19 _#define PIN_MOSI 16_ 20 _#define PIN_MISO 16 // same as MOSI, so we get loopback_ 21 22 _#define BUF_SIZE 20_ 23 24 void test(const pio_spi_inst_t *spi) { 25     static uint8_t txbuf[BUF_SIZE]; 26     static uint8_t rxbuf[BUF_SIZE]; 27     printf("TX:"); 28     for (int i = 0; i < BUF_SIZE; ++i) { 29         txbuf[i] = rand() >> 16; 30         rxbuf[i] = 0; 31         printf(" %02x", (int) txbuf[i]); 32     } 33     printf("\n"); 34 35     pio_spi_write8_read8_blocking(spi, txbuf, rxbuf, BUF_SIZE); 36 37     printf("RX:"); 38     bool mismatch = false; 39     for (int i = 0; i < BUF_SIZE; ++i) { 40         printf(" %02x", (int) rxbuf[i]); 41         mismatch = mismatch || rxbuf[i] != txbuf[i]; 42     } 43     if (mismatch) 44         printf("\nNope\n"); 45     else 46         printf("\nOK\n"); 47 } 48 49 int main() { 50     stdio_init_all();

3.6. Examples

**347**

RP2040 Datasheet

51 52     pio_spi_inst_t spi = { 53             .pio = pio0, 54             .sm = 0 55     }; 56     float clkdiv = 31.25f; _// 1 MHz @ 125 clk_sys_ 57     uint cpha0_prog_offs = pio_add_program(spi.pio, &spi_cpha0_program); 58     uint cpha1_prog_offs = pio_add_program(spi.pio, &spi_cpha1_program); 59 60     for (int cpha = 0; cpha <= 1; ++cpha) { 61         for (int cpol = 0; cpol <= 1; ++cpol) { 62             printf("CPHA = %d, CPOL = %d\n", cpha, cpol); 63             pio_spi_init(spi.pio, spi.sm, 64                          cpha ? cpha1_prog_offs : cpha0_prog_offs, 65                          8, _// 8 bits per SPI frame_ 66                          clkdiv, 67                          cpha, 68                          cpol, 69                          PIN_SCK, 70                          PIN_MOSI, 71                          PIN_MISO 72             ); 73             test(&spi); 74             sleep_ms(10); 75         } 76     } 77 }

## **3.6.2. WS2812 LEDs**

WS2812 LEDs are driven by a proprietary pulse-width serial format, with a wide positive pulse representing a "1" bit, and narrow positive pulse a "0". Each LED has a serial input and a serial output; LEDs are connected in a chain, with each serial input connected to the previous LED’s serial output.

_Figure 51. WS2812line format. Wide_ Symbol 1 0 0 1 Latch _positive pulse for 1,_ Output _narrow positive pulse for 0, very long_ LEDs consume 24 bits of pixel data, then pass any additional input data on to their output. In this way a single serial _negative pulse for latch enable_ burst can individually program the colour of each LED in a chain. A long negative pulse latches the pixel data into the LEDs.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/ws2812/ws2812.pio Lines 8 - 31_

8 .program ws2812 9 .side_set 1 10 11 ; The following constants are selected for broad compatibility with WS2812, 12 ; WS2812B, and SK6812 LEDs. Other constants may support higher bandwidths for 13 ; specific LEDs, such as (7,10,8) for WS2812B LEDs. 14 15 .define public T1 3 16 .define public T2 3 17 .define public T3 4 18 19 .lang_opt python sideset_init = pico.PIO.OUT_HIGH 20 .lang_opt python out_init     = pico.PIO.OUT_HIGH 21 .lang_opt python out_shiftdir = 1 22 23 .wrap_target

3.6. Examples

**348**

RP2040 Datasheet

24 bitloop: 25     out x, 1       side 0 [T3 - 1] ; Side-set still takes place when instruction stalls 26     jmp !x do_zero side 1 [T1 - 1] ; Branch on the bit we shifted out. Positive pulse 27 do_one: 28     jmp  bitloop   side 1 [T2 - 1] ; Continue driving high, for a long pulse 29 do_zero: 30     nop            side 0 [T2 - 1] ; Or drive low, for a short pulse 31 .wrap

This program shifts bits from the OSR into X, and produces a wide or narrow pulse on side-set pin 0, based on the value of each data bit. Autopull must be configured, with a threshold of 24. Software can then write 24-bit pixel values into the FIFO, and these will be serialised to a chain of WS2812 LEDs. The .pio file contains a C helper function to set this up:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/ws2812/ws2812.pio Lines 36 - 52_

36 static inline void ws2812_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin, float freq, bool rgbw) { 37 38     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 39     pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, true); 40 41     pio_sm_config c = ws2812_program_get_default_config(offset); 42     sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin); 43     sm_config_set_out_shift(&c, false, true, rgbw ? 32 : 24); 44     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_TX); 45 46     int cycles_per_bit = ws2812_T1 + ws2812_T2 + ws2812_T3; 47     float div = clock_get_hz(clk_sys) / (freq * cycles_per_bit); 48     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 49 50     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset, &c); 51     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 52 }

Because the shift is MSB-first, and our pixels aren’t a power of two size (so we can’t rely on the narrow write replication behaviour on RP2040 to fan out the bits for us), we need to preshift the values written to the TX FIFO.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/ws2812/ws2812.c Lines 43 - 45_

43 static inline void put_pixel(PIO pio, uint sm, uint32_t pixel_grb) { 44     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm, pixel_grb << 8u); 45 }

To DMA the pixels, we could instead set the autopull threshold to 8 bits, set the DMA transfer size to 8 bits, and write a byte at a time into the FIFO. Each pixel would be 3 one-byte transfers. Because of how the bus fabric and DMA on RP2040 work, each byte the DMA transfers will appear replicated four times when written to a 32-bit IO register, so effectively your data is at _both ends_ of the shift register, and you can shift in either direction without worry.

## **More detail?**

The WS2812 example is the subject of a tutorial in the **Raspberry Pi Pico-series C/C++ SDK** document, in the PIO chapter. The tutorial dissects the ws2812 program line by line, traces through how the program executes, and shows wave diagrams of the GPIO output at every point in the program.

3.6. Examples

**349**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **3.6.3. UART TX**

_Figure 52. UART serial format. The line is_ Bit Clock _high when idle. Thetransmitter pulls the_ StateTX Idle Start 0 1 2 Data (LSB first)3 4 5 6 7 Stop _line down for one bit period to signify the_ This program implements the transmit component of a universal asynchronous receive/transmit (UART) serial _start of a serial frame (the "start bit"), and a_ peripheral. Perhaps it would be more correct to refer to this as a UAT. _small, fixed number of data bits follows. The Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_tx/uart_tx.pio Lines 8 - 18 line returns to the idle state for at least one bit period (the "stop_ 8 .program uart_tx _bit") before the next_ 9 .side_set 1 opt _serial frame can_ 10 _begin._

8 .program uart_tx 9 .side_set 1 opt 10 11 ; An 8n1 UART transmit program. 12 ; OUT pin 0 and side-set pin 0 are both mapped to UART TX pin. 13 14     pull       side 1 [7]  ; Assert stop bit, or stall with line in idle state 15     set x, 7   side 0 [7]  ; Preload bit counter, assert start bit for 8 clocks 16 bitloop:                   ; This loop will run 8 times (8n1 UART) 17     out pins, 1            ; Shift 1 bit from OSR to the first OUT pin 18     jmp x-- bitloop   [6]  ; Each loop iteration is 8 cycles.

As written, it will:

- [Stall with the pin driven high until data appears (noting that side-set takes effect even when the state machine is] stalled)

- [Assert a start bit, for 8 SM execution cycles]

- [Shift out 8 data bits, each lasting for 8 cycles]

- [Return to the idle line state for at least 8 cycles before asserting the next start bit]

If the state machine’s clock divider is configured to run at 8 times the desired baud rate, this program will transmit wellformed UART serial frames, whenever data is pushed to the TX FIFO either by software or the system DMA. To extend the program to cover different frame sizes (different numbers of data bits), the set x, 7 could be replaced with mov x, y, so that the y scratch register becomes a per-SM configuration register for UART frame size.

The .pio file in the SDK also contains this function, for configuring the pins and the state machine, once the program has been loaded into the PIO instruction memory:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_tx/uart_tx.pio Lines 24 - 51_

24 static inline void uart_tx_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin_tx, uint baud) { 25 _// Tell PIO to initially drive output-high on the selected pin, then map PIO_ 26 _// onto that pin with the IO muxes._ 27     pio_sm_set_pins_with_mask64(pio, sm, 1ull << pin_tx, 1ull << pin_tx); 28     pio_sm_set_pindirs_with_mask64(pio, sm, 1ull << pin_tx, 1ull << pin_tx); 29     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin_tx); 30 31     pio_sm_config c = uart_tx_program_get_default_config(offset); 32 33 _// OUT shifts to right, no autopull_ 34     sm_config_set_out_shift(&c, true, false, 32); 35 36 _// We are mapping both OUT and side-set to the same pin, because sometimes_ 37 _// we need to assert user data onto the pin (with OUT) and sometimes_ 38 _// assert constant values (start/stop bit)_ 39     sm_config_set_out_pins(&c, pin_tx, 1); 40     sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin_tx);

3.6. Examples

**350**

RP2040 Datasheet

41 42 _// We only need TX, so get an 8-deep FIFO!_ 43     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_TX); 44 45 _// SM transmits 1 bit per 8 execution cycles._ 46     float div = (float)clock_get_hz(clk_sys) / (8 * baud); 47     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 48 49     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset, &c); 50     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 51 }

The state machine is configured to shift right in out instructions, because UARTs typically send data LSB-first. Once configured, the state machine will print any characters pushed to the TX FIFO.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_tx/uart_tx.pio Lines 53 - 55_

53 static inline void uart_tx_program_putc(PIO pio, uint sm, char c) { 54     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm, (uint32_t)c); 55 }

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_tx/uart_tx.pio Lines 57 - 60_

57 static inline void uart_tx_program_puts(PIO pio, uint sm, const char *s) { 58     while (*s) 59         uart_tx_program_putc(pio, sm, *s++); 60 }

The example program in the SDK will configure one PIO state machine as a UART TX peripheral, and use it to print a message on GPIO 0 at 115200 baud once per second.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_tx/uart_tx.c_

1 _/**_ 2 _* Copyright (c) 2020 Raspberry Pi (Trading) Ltd._ 3 _*_ 4 _* SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause_ 5 _*/_ 6 7 _#include "pico/stdlib.h"_ 8 _#include "hardware/pio.h"_ 9 _#include "uart_tx.pio.h"_ 10 11 _// We're going to use PIO to print "Hello, world!" on the same GPIO which we_ 12 _// normally attach UART0 to._ 13 _#define PIO_TX_PIN 0_ 14 15 _// Check the pin is compatible with the platform_ 16 _#error Attempting to use a pin>=32 on a platform that does not support it_ 17 18 int main() { 19 _// This is the same as the default UART baud rate on Pico_ 20     const uint SERIAL_BAUD = 115200; 21 22     PIO pio; 23     uint sm; 24     uint offset; 25

3.6. Examples

**351**

RP2040 Datasheet

26 _// This will find a free pio and state machine for our program and load it for us_ 27 _// We use pio_claim_free_sm_and_add_program_for_gpio_range (for_gpio_range variant)_ 28 _// so we will get a PIO instance suitable for addressing gpios >= 32 if needed and supported by the hardware_ 29     bool success = pio_claim_free_sm_and_add_program_for_gpio_range(&uart_tx_program, &pio, &sm, &offset, PIO_TX_PIN, 1, true); 30     hard_assert(success); 31 32     uart_tx_program_init(pio, sm, offset, PIO_TX_PIN, SERIAL_BAUD); 33 34     while (true) { 35         uart_tx_program_puts(pio, sm, "Hello, world! (from PIO!)\r\n"); 36         sleep_ms(1000); 37     } 38 39 _// This will free resources and unload our program_ 40     pio_remove_program_and_unclaim_sm(&uart_tx_program, pio, sm, offset); 41 }

With the two PIO instances on RP2040, this could be extended to 8 additional UART TX interfaces, on 8 different pins, with 8 different baud rates.

## **3.6.4. UART RX**

Recalling Figure 52 showing the format of an 8n1 UART:

**==> picture [247 x 37] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Bit Clock<br>TX 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7<br>State Idle Start Data (LSB first) Stop<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


We can recover the data by waiting for the start bit, sampling 8 times with the correct timing, and pushing the result to the RX FIFO. Below is possibly the shortest program which can do this:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_rx/uart_rx.pio Lines 8 - 19_

8 .program uart_rx_mini 9 10 ; Minimum viable 8n1 UART receiver. Wait for the start bit, then sample 8 bits 11 ; with the correct timing. 12 ; IN pin 0 is mapped to the GPIO used as UART RX. 13 ; Autopush must be enabled, with a threshold of 8. 14 15     wait 0 pin 0        ; Wait for start bit 16     set x, 7 [10]       ; Preload bit counter, delay until eye of first data bit 17 bitloop:                ; Loop 8 times 18     in pins, 1          ; Sample data 19     jmp x-- bitloop [6] ; Each iteration is 8 cycles

This works, but it has some annoying characteristics, like repeatedly outputting NUL characters if the line is stuck low. Ideally, we would want to drop data that is not correctly framed by a start and stop bit (and set some sticky flag to indicate this has happened), and pause receiving when the line is stuck low for long periods. We can add these to our program, at the cost of a few more instructions.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_rx/uart_rx.pio Lines 44 - 63_

44 .program uart_rx 45 46 ; Slightly more fleshed-out 8n1 UART receiver which handles framing errors and

3.6. Examples

**352**

RP2040 Datasheet

47 ; break conditions more gracefully. 48 ; IN pin 0 and JMP pin are both mapped to the GPIO used as UART RX. 49 50 start: 51     wait 0 pin 0        ; Stall until start bit is asserted 52     set x, 7    [10]    ; Preload bit counter, then delay until halfway through 53 bitloop:                ; the first data bit (12 cycles incl wait, set). 54     in pins, 1          ; Shift data bit into ISR 55     jmp x-- bitloop [6] ; Loop 8 times, each loop iteration is 8 cycles 56     jmp pin good_stop   ; Check stop bit (should be high) 57 58     irq 4 rel           ; Either a framing error or a break. Set a sticky flag, 59     wait 1 pin 0        ; and wait for line to return to idle state. 60     jmp start           ; Don't push data if we didn't see good framing. 61 62 good_stop:              ; No delay before returning to start; a little slack is 63     push                ; important in case the TX clock is slightly too fast.

The second example does not use autopush (Section 3.5.4), preferring instead to use an explicit push instruction, so that it can condition the push on whether a correct stop bit is seen. The .pio file includes a helper function which configures the state machine and connects it to a GPIO with the pull-up enabled:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_rx/uart_rx.pio Lines 67 - 85_

67 static inline void uart_rx_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin, uint baud) { 68     pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, false); 69     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 70     gpio_pull_up(pin); 71 72     pio_sm_config c = uart_rx_program_get_default_config(offset); 73     sm_config_set_in_pins(&c, pin); _// for WAIT, IN_ 74     sm_config_set_jmp_pin(&c, pin); _// for JMP_ 75 _// Shift to right, autopush disabled_ 76     sm_config_set_in_shift(&c, true, false, 32); 77 _// Deeper FIFO as we're not doing any TX_ 78     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_RX); 79 _// SM transmits 1 bit per 8 execution cycles._ 80     float div = (float)clock_get_hz(clk_sys) / (8 * baud); 81     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 82 83     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset, &c); 84     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 85 }

To correctly receive data which is sent LSB-first, the ISR is configured to shift to the right. After shifting in 8 bits, this unfortunately leaves our 8 data bits in bits 31:24 of the ISR, with 24 zeroes in the LSBs. One option here is an in null, 24 instruction to shuffle the ISR contents down to 7:0. Another is to read from the FIFO at an offset of 3 bytes, with an 8-bit read, so that the processor’s bus hardware (or the DMA’s) picks out the relevant byte for free:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_rx/uart_rx.pio Lines 87 - 93_

87 static inline char uart_rx_program_getc(PIO pio, uint sm) { 88 _// 8-bit read from the uppermost byte of the FIFO, as data is left-justified_ 89     io_rw_8 *rxfifo_shift = (io_rw_8*)&pio->rxf[sm] + 3; 90     while (pio_sm_is_rx_fifo_empty(pio, sm)) 91         tight_loop_contents(); 92     return (char)*rxfifo_shift; 93 }

3.6. Examples

**353**

RP2040 Datasheet

An example program shows how this UART RX program can be used to receive characters sent by one of the hardware UARTs on RP2040. A wire must be connected from GPIO4 to GPIO3 for this program to function. To make the wrangling of 3 different serial ports a little easier, this program uses core 1 to print out a string on the test UART (UART 1), and the code running on core 0 will pull out characters from the PIO state machine, and pass them along to the UART used for the debug console (UART 0). Another approach here would be interrupt-based IO, using PIO’s FIFO IRQs. If the SM0_RXNEMPTY bit is set in the IRQ0_INTE register, then PIO will raise its first interrupt request line whenever there is a character in state machine 0’s RX FIFO.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/uart_rx/uart_rx.c_

1 _/**_ 2 _* Copyright (c) 2020 Raspberry Pi (Trading) Ltd._ 3 _*_ 4 _* SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause_ 5 _*/_ 6 7 _#include <stdio.h>_ 8 9 _#include "pico/stdlib.h"_ 10 _#include "pico/multicore.h"_ 11 _#include "hardware/pio.h"_ 12 _#include "hardware/uart.h"_ 13 _#include "uart_rx.pio.h"_ 14 15 _// This program_ 16 _// - Uses UART1 (the spare UART, by default) to transmit some text_ 17 _// - Uses a PIO state machine to receive that text_ 18 _// - Prints out the received text to the default console (UART0)_ 19 _// This might require some reconfiguration on boards where UART1 is the_ 20 _// default UART._ 21 22 _#define SERIAL_BAUD PICO_DEFAULT_UART_BAUD_RATE_ 23 _#define HARD_UART_INST uart1_ 24 25 _// You'll need a wire from GPIO4 -> GPIO3_ 26 _#define HARD_UART_TX_PIN 4_ 27 _#define PIO_RX_PIN 3_ 28 29 _// Check the pin is compatible with the platform_ 30 _#error Attempting to use a pin>=32 on a platform that does not support it_ 31 32 _// Ask core 1 to print a string, to make things easier on core 0_ 33 void core1_main() { 34     const char *s = (const char *) multicore_fifo_pop_blocking(); 35     uart_puts(HARD_UART_INST, s); 36 } 37 38 int main() { 39 _// Console output (also a UART, yes it's confusing)_ 40     setup_default_uart(); 41     printf("Starting PIO UART RX example\n"); 42 43 _// Set up the hard UART we're going to use to print characters_ 44     uart_init(HARD_UART_INST, SERIAL_BAUD); 45     gpio_set_function(HARD_UART_TX_PIN, GPIO_FUNC_UART); 46 47 _// Set up the state machine we're going to use to receive them._ 48     PIO pio; 49     uint sm; 50     uint offset; 51 52 _// This will find a free pio and state machine for our program and load it for us_

3.6. Examples

**354**

RP2040 Datasheet

53 _// We use pio_claim_free_sm_and_add_program_for_gpio_range (for_gpio_range variant)_ 54 _// so we will get a PIO instance suitable for addressing gpios >= 32 if needed and supported by the hardware_ 55     bool success = pio_claim_free_sm_and_add_program_for_gpio_range(&uart_rx_program, &pio, &sm, &offset, PIO_RX_PIN, 1, true); 56     hard_assert(success); 57 58     uart_rx_program_init(pio, sm, offset, PIO_RX_PIN, SERIAL_BAUD); 59 _//uart_rx_mini_program_init(pio, sm, offset, PIO_RX_PIN, SERIAL_BAUD);_ 60 61 _// Tell core 1 to print some text to uart1 as fast as it can_ 62     multicore_launch_core1(core1_main); 63     const char *text = "Hello, world from PIO! (Plus 2 UARTs and 2 cores, for complex reasons)\n"; 64     multicore_fifo_push_blocking((uint32_t) text); 65 66 _// Echo characters received from PIO to the console_ 67     while (true) { 68         char c = uart_rx_program_getc(pio, sm); 69         putchar(c); 70     } 71 72 _// This will free resources and unload our program_ 73     pio_remove_program_and_unclaim_sm(&uart_rx_program, pio, sm, offset); 74 }

## **3.6.5. Manchester Serial TX and RX**

_Figure 53. Manchester serial line code. Each data bit is represented by either a high pulse followed by a low pulse (representing a Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/manchester_encoding/manchester_encoding.pio Lines 8 - 30 '0' bit) or a low pulse followed by a high_ 8 .program manchester_tx _pulse (a '1' bit)._ 9 .side_set 1 opt 10 11 ; Transmit one bit every 12 cycles. a '0' is encoded as a high-low sequence 12 ; (each part lasting half a bit period, or 6 cycles) and a '1' is encoded as a 13 ; low-high sequence. 14 ; 15 ; Side-set bit 0 must be mapped to the GPIO used for TX. 16 ; Autopull must be enabled -- this program does not care about the threshold. 17 ; The program starts at the public label 'start'. 18 19 .wrap_target 20 do_1: 21     nop         side 0 [5] ; Low for 6 cycles (5 delay, +1 for nop) 22     jmp get_bit side 1 [3] ; High for 4 cycles. 'get_bit' takes another 2 cycles 23 do_0: 24     nop         side 1 [5] ; Output high for 6 cycles 25     nop         side 0 [3] ; Output low for 4 cycles 26 public start: 27 get_bit: 28     out x, 1               ; Always shift out one bit from OSR to X, so we can 29     jmp !x do_0            ; branch on it. Autopull refills the OSR when empty. 30 .wrap

Starting from the label called start, this program shifts one data bit at a time into the X register, so that it can branch on

3.6. Examples

**355**

RP2040 Datasheet

the value. Depending on the outcome, it uses side-set to drive either a 1-0 or 0-1 sequence onto the chosen GPIO. This program uses autopull (Section 3.5.4.2) to automatically replenish the OSR from the TX FIFO once a certain amount of data has been shifted out, without interrupting program control flow or timing. This feature is enabled by a helper function in the .pio file which configures and starts the state machine:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/manchester_encoding/manchester_encoding.pio Lines 33 - 46_

33 static inline void manchester_tx_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin, float div) { 34     pio_sm_set_pins_with_mask(pio, sm, 0, 1u << pin); 35     pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, true); 36     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 37 38     pio_sm_config c = manchester_tx_program_get_default_config(offset); 39     sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin); 40     sm_config_set_out_shift(&c, true, true, 32); 41     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_TX); 42     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 43     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset + manchester_tx_offset_start, &c); 44 45     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 46 }

Another state machine can be programmed to recover the original data from the transmitted signal:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/manchester_encoding/manchester_encoding.pio Lines 49 - 71_

49 .program manchester_rx 50 51 ; Assumes line is idle low, first bit is 0 52 ; One bit is 12 cycles 53 ; a '0' is encoded as 10 54 ; a '1' is encoded as 01 55 ; 56 ; Both the IN base and the JMP pin mapping must be pointed at the GPIO used for RX. 57 ; Autopush must be enabled. 58 ; Before enabling the SM, it should be placed in a 'wait 1, pin` state, so that 59 ; it will not start sampling until the initial line idle state ends. 60 61 start_of_0:            ; We are 0.25 bits into a 0 - signal is high 62     wait 0 pin 0       ; Wait for the 1->0 transition - at this point we are 0.5 into the bit 63     in y, 1 [8]        ; Emit a 0, sleep 3/4 of a bit 64     jmp pin start_of_0 ; If signal is 1 again, it's another 0 bit, otherwise it's a 1 65 66 .wrap_target 67 start_of_1:            ; We are 0.25 bits into a 1 - signal is 1 68     wait 1 pin 0       ; Wait for the 0->1 transition - at this point we are 0.5 into the bit 69     in x, 1 [8]        ; Emit a 1, sleep 3/4 of a bit 70     jmp pin start_of_0 ; If signal is 0 again, it's another 1 bit otherwise it's a 0 71 .wrap

The main complication here is staying aligned to the input transitions, as the transmitter’s and receiver’s clocks may drift relative to one another. In Manchester code there is always a transition in the centre of the symbol, and based on the initial line state (high or low) we know the direction of this transition, so we can use a wait instruction to resynchronise to the line transitions on every data bit.

This program expects the X and Y registers to be initialised with the values 1 and 0 respectively, so that a constant 1 or 0 can be provided to the in instruction. The code that configures the state machine initialises these registers by executing some set instructions before setting the program running.

3.6. Examples

**356**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/manchester_encoding/manchester_encoding.pio Lines 74 - 94_

74 static inline void manchester_rx_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin, float div) { 75     pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, false); 76     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 77 78     pio_sm_config c = manchester_rx_program_get_default_config(offset); 79     sm_config_set_in_pins(&c, pin); _// for WAIT_ 80     sm_config_set_jmp_pin(&c, pin); _// for JMP_ 81     sm_config_set_in_shift(&c, true, true, 32); 82     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_RX); 83     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 84     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset, &c); 85 86 _// X and Y are set to 0 and 1, to conveniently emit these to ISR/FIFO._ 87     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_set(pio_x, 1)); 88     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_set(pio_y, 0)); 89 _// Assume line is idle low, and first transmitted bit is 0. Put SM in a_ 90 _// wait state before enabling. RX will begin once the first 0 symbol is_ 91 _// detected._ 92     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_wait_pin(1, 0) | pio_encode_delay(2)); 93     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 94 }

The example C program in the SDK will transmit Manchester serial data from GPIO2 to GPIO3 at approximately 10Mbps (assuming a system clock of 125MHz).

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/manchester_encoding/manchester_encoding.c Lines 20 - 43_

20 int main() { 21     stdio_init_all(); 22 23     PIO pio = pio0; 24     uint sm_tx = 0; 25     uint sm_rx = 1; 26 27     uint offset_tx = pio_add_program(pio, &manchester_tx_program); 28     uint offset_rx = pio_add_program(pio, &manchester_rx_program); 29     printf("Transmit program loaded at %d\n", offset_tx); 30     printf("Receive program loaded at %d\n", offset_rx); 31 32     manchester_tx_program_init(pio, sm_tx, offset_tx, pin_tx, 1.f); 33     manchester_rx_program_init(pio, sm_rx, offset_rx, pin_rx, 1.f); 34 35     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm_tx, false); 36     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm_tx, 0); 37     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm_tx, 0x0ff0a55a); 38     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm_tx, 0x12345678); 39     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm_tx, true); 40 41     for (int i = 0; i < 3; ++i) 42         printf("%08x\n", pio_sm_get_blocking(pio, sm_rx)); 43 }

## **3.6.6. Differential Manchester (BMC) TX and RX**

3.6. Examples

**357**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 54. Differential Manchester serial line code, also known as biphase mark code (BMC). The line transitions at the start_ The transmit program is similar to the Manchester example: it repeatedly shifts a bit from the OSR into X (relying on _of every bit period. The presence of a_ autopull to refill the OSR in the background), branches, and drives a GPIO up and down based on the value of this bit. _transition in the centre_ The added complication is that the pattern we drive onto the pin depends not just on the value of the data bit, as with _of the bit period_ vanilla Manchester encoding, but also on the state the line was left in at the end of the last bit period. This is illustrated _signifies a_ 1 _data bit, and the absence, a_ 0 in Figure 54, where the pattern is inverted if the line is initially high. To cope with this, there are two copies of the test- _bit. These encoding_ and-drive code, one for each initial line state, and these are linked together in the correct order by a sequence of jumps. _rules are the same whether the line has Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/differential_manchester/differential_manchester.pio Lines 8 - 35 an initial high or low state._

8 .program differential_manchester_tx 9 .side_set 1 opt 10 11 ; Transmit one bit every 16 cycles. In each bit period: 12 ; - A '0' is encoded as a transition at the start of the bit period 13 ; - A '1' is encoded as a transition at the start *and* in the middle 14 ; 15 ; Side-set bit 0 must be mapped to the data output pin. 16 ; Autopull must be enabled. 17 18 public start: 19 initial_high: 20     out x, 1                     ; Start of bit period: always assert transition 21     jmp !x high_0     side 1 [6] ; Test the data bit we just shifted out of OSR 22 high_1: 23     nop 24     jmp initial_high  side 0 [6] ; For `1` bits, also transition in the middle 25 high_0: 26     jmp initial_low          [7] ; Otherwise, the line is stable in the middle 27 28 initial_low: 29     out x, 1                     ; Always shift 1 bit from OSR to X so we can 30     jmp !x low_0      side 0 [6] ; branch on it. Autopull refills OSR for us. 31 low_1: 32     nop 33     jmp initial_low   side 1 [6] ; If there are two transitions, return to 34 low_0: 35     jmp initial_high         [7] ; the initial line state is flipped!

The .pio file also includes a helper function to initialise a state machine for differential Manchester TX, and connect it to a chosen GPIO. We arbitrarily choose a 32-bit frame size and LSB-first serialisation (shift_to_right is true in sm_config_set_out_shift), but as the program operates on one bit at a time, we could change this by reconfiguring the state machine.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/differential_manchester/differential_manchester.pio Lines 38 - 53_

38 static inline void differential_manchester_tx_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin, float div) { 39     pio_sm_set_pins_with_mask(pio, sm, 0, 1u << pin); 40     pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, true); 41     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 42 43     pio_sm_config c = differential_manchester_tx_program_get_default_config(offset); 44     sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin); 45     sm_config_set_out_shift(&c, true, true, 32); 46     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_TX); 47     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div);

3.6. Examples

**358**

RP2040 Datasheet

48     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset + differential_manchester_tx_offset_start, &c); 49 50 _// Execute a blocking pull so that we maintain the initial line state until data is available_ 51     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_pull(false, true)); 52     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 53 }

The RX program uses the following strategy:

- [Wait until the initial transition at the start of the bit period, so we stay aligned to the transmit clock]

- [Then wait 3/4 of the configured bit period, so that we are centred on the second half-bit-period (see ][Figure 54][)]

- [Sample the line at this point to determine whether there are one or two transitions in this bit period]

- [Repeat]

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/differential_manchester/differential_manchester.pio Lines 55 - 85_

55 .program differential_manchester_rx 56 57 ; Assumes line is idle low 58 ; One bit is 16 cycles. In each bit period: 59 ; - A '0' is encoded as a transition at time 0 60 ; - A '1' is encoded as a transition at time 0 and a transition at time T/2 61 ; 62 ; The IN mapping and the JMP pin select must both be mapped to the GPIO used for 63 ; RX data. Autopush must be enabled. 64 65 public start: 66 initial_high:           ; Find rising edge at start of bit period 67     wait 1 pin, 0  [11] ; Delay to eye of second half-period (i.e 3/4 of way 68     jmp pin high_0      ; through bit) and branch on RX pin high/low. 69 high_1: 70     in x, 1             ; Second transition detected (a `1` data symbol) 71     jmp initial_high 72 high_0: 73     in y, 1 [1]         ; Line still high, no centre transition (data is `0`) 74     ; Fall-through 75 76 .wrap_target 77 initial_low:            ; Find falling edge at start of bit period 78     wait 0 pin, 0 [11]  ; Delay to eye of second half-period 79     jmp pin low_1 80 low_0: 81     in y, 1             ; Line still low, no centre transition (data is `0`) 82     jmp initial_high 83 low_1:                  ; Second transition detected (data is `1`) 84     in x, 1 [1] 85 .wrap

This code assumes that X and Y have the values 1 and 0, respectively. This is arranged for by the included C helper function:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/differential_manchester/differential_manchester.pio Lines 88 - 104_

88 static inline void differential_manchester_rx_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin, float div) { 89     pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, false); 90     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 91

3.6. Examples

**359**

RP2040 Datasheet

92     pio_sm_config c = differential_manchester_rx_program_get_default_config(offset); 93     sm_config_set_in_pins(&c, pin); _// for WAIT_ 94     sm_config_set_jmp_pin(&c, pin); _// for JMP_ 95     sm_config_set_in_shift(&c, true, true, 32); 96     sm_config_set_fifo_join(&c, PIO_FIFO_JOIN_RX); 97     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 98     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset, &c); 99 100 _// X and Y are set to 0 and 1, to conveniently emit these to ISR/FIFO._ 101     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_set(pio_x, 1)); 102     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_set(pio_y, 0)); 103     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 104 }

All the pieces now exist to loopback some serial data over a wire between two GPIOs.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/differential_manchester/differential_manchester.c_

1 _/**_ 2 _* Copyright (c) 2020 Raspberry Pi (Trading) Ltd._ 3 _*_ 4 _* SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause_ 5 _*/_ 6 7 _#include <stdio.h>_ 8 9 _#include "pico/stdlib.h"_ 10 _#include "hardware/pio.h"_ 11 _#include "differential_manchester.pio.h"_ 12 13 _// Differential serial transmit/receive example_ 14 _// Need to connect a wire from GPIO2 -> GPIO3_ 15 16 const uint pin_tx = 2; 17 const uint pin_rx = 3; 18 19 int main() { 20     stdio_init_all(); 21 22     PIO pio = pio0; 23     uint sm_tx = 0; 24     uint sm_rx = 1; 25 26     uint offset_tx = pio_add_program(pio, &differential_manchester_tx_program); 27     uint offset_rx = pio_add_program(pio, &differential_manchester_rx_program); 28     printf("Transmit program loaded at %d\n", offset_tx); 29     printf("Receive program loaded at %d\n", offset_rx); 30 31 _// Configure state machines, set bit rate at 5 Mbps_ 32     differential_manchester_tx_program_init(pio, sm_tx, offset_tx, pin_tx, 125.f / (16 * 5)); 33     differential_manchester_rx_program_init(pio, sm_rx, offset_rx, pin_rx, 125.f / (16 * 5)); 34 35     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm_tx, false); 36     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm_tx, 0); 37     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm_tx, 0x0ff0a55a); 38     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm_tx, 0x12345678); 39     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm_tx, true); 40 41     for (int i = 0; i < 3; ++i) 42         printf("%08x\n", pio_sm_get_blocking(pio, sm_rx)); 43 }

3.6. Examples

**360**

RP2040 Datasheet

## **3.6.7. I2C**

_Figure 55. A 1-byte I2C read transfer. In the idle state, both lines float high. The initiator drives SDA low (a Start condition),_ I2C is an ubiquitous serial bus first described in the Dead Sea Scrolls, and later used by Philips Semiconductor. Two _followed by 7 address bits A6-A0, and a_ wires with pull-up resistors form an open-drain bus, and multiple agents address and signal one another over this bus by _direction bit_ driving the bus lines low, or releasing them to be pulled high. It has a number of unusual attributes: _(Read/nWrite). The target drives SDA low_ •[SCL can be held low at any time, for any duration, by any member of the bus (not necessarily the target or initiator] _to acknowledge the_ of the transfer). This is known as clock stretching. The bus does not advance until all drivers release the clock. _address (ACK). Data bytes follow. The_ •[Members of the bus can be a target of one transfer and initiate other transfers (the master/slave roles are not] _target serialises data on SDA, clocked out_ fixed). However this is poorly supported by most I2C hardware. _by SCL. Every 9thclock, the_ **initiator** •[SCL is not an edge-sensitive clock, rather SDA must be valid the entire time SCL is high] _pulls SDA low toacknowledge the data,_ •[In spite of the transparency of SDA against SCL, transitions of SDA whilst SCL is high are used to mark beginning] _except on the last_ and end of transfers (Start/Stop), or a new address phase within one (Restart) _byte, where it leaves the line high (NAK)._ The PIO program listed below handles serialisation, clock stretching, and checking of ACKs in the initiator role. It _Releasing SDA whilst_ provides a mechanism for escaping PIO instructions in the FIFO datastream, to issue Start/Stop/Restart sequences at _SCL is high is a Stop_ appropriate times. Provided no unexpected NAKs are received, this can perform long sequences of I2C transfers from a _condition, returning the bus to idle._ DMA buffer, without processor intervention.

I2C is an ubiquitous serial bus first described in the Dead Sea Scrolls, and later used by Philips Semiconductor. Two wires with pull-up resistors form an open-drain bus, and multiple agents address and signal one another over this bus by driving the bus lines low, or releasing them to be pulled high. It has a number of unusual attributes:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/i2c.pio Lines 8 - 73_

8 .program i2c 9 .side_set 1 opt pindirs 10 11 ; TX Encoding: 12 ; | 15:10 | 9     | 8:1  | 0   | 13 ; | Instr | Final | Data | NAK | 14 ; 15 ; If Instr has a value n > 0, then this FIFO word has no 16 ; data payload, and the next n + 1 words will be executed as instructions. 17 ; Otherwise, shift out the 8 data bits, followed by the ACK bit. 18 ; 19 ; The Instr mechanism allows stop/start/repstart sequences to be programmed 20 ; by the processor, and then carried out by the state machine at defined points 21 ; in the datastream. 22 ; 23 ; The "Final" field should be set for the final byte in a transfer. 24 ; This tells the state machine to ignore a NAK: if this field is not 25 ; set, then any NAK will cause the state machine to halt and interrupt. 26 ; 27 ; Autopull should be enabled, with a threshold of 16. 28 ; Autopush should be enabled, with a threshold of 8. 29 ; The TX FIFO should be accessed with halfword writes, to ensure 30 ; the data is immediately available in the OSR. 31 ; 32 ; Pin mapping: 33 ; - Input pin 0 is SDA, 1 is SCL (if clock stretching used) 34 ; - Jump pin is SDA 35 ; - Side-set pin 0 is SCL 36 ; - Set pin 0 is SDA 37 ; - OUT pin 0 is SDA 38 ; - SCL must be SDA + 1 (for wait mapping) 39 ; 40 ; The OE outputs should be inverted in the system IO controls! 41 ; (It's possible for the inversion to be done in this program, 42 ; but costs 2 instructions: 1 for inversion, and one to cope

3.6. Examples

**361**

RP2040 Datasheet

43 ; with the side effect of the MOV on TX shift counter.) 44 45 do_nack: 46     jmp y-- entry_point        ; Continue if NAK was expected 47     irq wait 0 rel             ; Otherwise stop, ask for help 48 49 do_byte: 50     set x, 7                   ; Loop 8 times 51 bitloop: 52     out pindirs, 1         [7] ; Serialise write data (all-ones if reading) 53     nop             side 1 [2] ; SCL rising edge 54     wait 1 pin, 1          [4] ; Allow clock to be stretched 55     in pins, 1             [7] ; Sample read data in middle of SCL pulse 56     jmp x-- bitloop side 0 [7] ; SCL falling edge 57 58     ; Handle ACK pulse 59     out pindirs, 1         [7] ; On reads, we provide the ACK. 60     nop             side 1 [7] ; SCL rising edge 61     wait 1 pin, 1          [7] ; Allow clock to be stretched 62     jmp pin do_nack side 0 [2] ; Test SDA for ACK/NAK, fall through if ACK 63 64 public entry_point: 65 .wrap_target 66     out x, 6                   ; Unpack Instr count 67     out y, 1                   ; Unpack the NAK ignore bit 68     jmp !x do_byte             ; Instr == 0, this is a data record. 69     out null, 32               ; Instr > 0, remainder of this OSR is invalid 70 do_exec: 71     out exec, 16               ; Execute one instruction per FIFO word 72     jmp x-- do_exec            ; Repeat n + 1 times 73 .wrap

The IO mapping required by the I2C program is quite complex, due to the different ways that the two serial lines must be driven and sampled. One interesting feature is that state machine must drive the output enable high when the output is low, since the bus is open-drain, so the sense of the data is inverted. This could be handled in the PIO program (e.g. mov osr, ~osr), but instead we can use the IO controls on RP2040 to perform this inversion in the GPIO muxes, saving an instruction.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/i2c.pio Lines 81 - 121_

81 static inline void i2c_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin_sda, uint pin_scl) { 82     assert(pin_scl == pin_sda + 1); 83     pio_sm_config c = i2c_program_get_default_config(offset); 84 85 _// IO mapping_ 86     sm_config_set_out_pins(&c, pin_sda, 1); 87     sm_config_set_set_pins(&c, pin_sda, 1); 88     sm_config_set_in_pins(&c, pin_sda); 89     sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin_scl); 90     sm_config_set_jmp_pin(&c, pin_sda); 91 92     sm_config_set_out_shift(&c, false, true, 16); 93     sm_config_set_in_shift(&c, false, true, 8); 94 95     float div = (float)clock_get_hz(clk_sys) / (32 * 100000); 96     sm_config_set_clkdiv(&c, div); 97 98 _// Try to avoid glitching the bus while connecting the IOs. Get things set_ 99 _// up so that pin is driven down when PIO asserts OE low, and pulled up_ 100 _// otherwise._

3.6. Examples

**362**

RP2040 Datasheet

101     gpio_pull_up(pin_scl); 102     gpio_pull_up(pin_sda); 103     uint32_t both_pins = (1u << pin_sda) | (1u << pin_scl); 104     pio_sm_set_pins_with_mask(pio, sm, both_pins, both_pins); 105     pio_sm_set_pindirs_with_mask(pio, sm, both_pins, both_pins); 106     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin_sda); 107     gpio_set_oeover(pin_sda, GPIO_OVERRIDE_INVERT); 108     pio_gpio_init(pio, pin_scl); 109     gpio_set_oeover(pin_scl, GPIO_OVERRIDE_INVERT); 110     pio_sm_set_pins_with_mask(pio, sm, 0, both_pins); 111 112 _// Clear IRQ flag before starting, and make sure flag doesn't actually_ 113 _// assert a system-level interrupt (we're using it as a status flag)_ 114     pio_set_irq0_source_enabled(pio, (enum pio_interrupt_source) ((uint) pis_interrupt0 + sm), false); 115     pio_set_irq1_source_enabled(pio, (enum pio_interrupt_source) ((uint) pis_interrupt0 + sm), false); 116     pio_interrupt_clear(pio, sm); 117 118 _// Configure and start SM_ 119     pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset + i2c_offset_entry_point, &c); 120     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 121 }

We can also use the PIO assembler to generate a table of instructions for passing through the FIFO, for Start/Stop/Restart conditions.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/i2c.pio Lines 126 - 136_

126 .program set_scl_sda 127 .side_set 1 opt 128 129 ; Assemble a table of instructions which software can select from, and pass 130 ; into the FIFO, to issue START/STOP/RSTART. This isn't intended to be run as 131 ; a complete program. 132 133     set pindirs, 0 side 0 [7] ; SCL = 0, SDA = 0 134     set pindirs, 1 side 0 [7] ; SCL = 0, SDA = 1 135     set pindirs, 0 side 1 [7] ; SCL = 1, SDA = 0 136     set pindirs, 1 side 1 [7] ; SCL = 1, SDA = 1

The example code does blocking software IO on the state machine’s FIFOs, to avoid the extra complexity of setting up the system DMA. For example, an I2C start condition is enqueued like so:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/pio_i2c.c Lines 69 - 73_

69 void pio_i2c_start(PIO pio, uint sm) { 70     pio_i2c_put_or_err(pio, sm, 1u << PIO_I2C_ICOUNT_LSB); _// Escape code for 2 instruction sequence_ 71     pio_i2c_put_or_err(pio, sm, set_scl_sda_program_instructions[I2C_SC1_SD0]); _// We are already in idle state, just pull SDA low_ 72     pio_i2c_put_or_err(pio, sm, set_scl_sda_program_instructions[I2C_SC0_SD0]); _// Also pull clock low so we can present data_ 73 }

Because I2C can go wrong at so many points, we need to be able to check the error flag asserted by the state machine, clear the halt and restart it, before asserting a Stop condition and releasing the bus.

3.6. Examples

**363**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/pio_i2c.c Lines 15 - 17_

15 bool pio_i2c_check_error(PIO pio, uint sm) { 16     return pio_interrupt_get(pio, sm); 17 }

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/pio_i2c.c Lines 19 - 23_

19 void pio_i2c_resume_after_error(PIO pio, uint sm) { 20     pio_sm_drain_tx_fifo(pio, sm); 21     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, (pio->sm[sm].execctrl & PIO_SM0_EXECCTRL_WRAP_BOTTOM_BITS) >> PIO_SM0_EXECCTRL_WRAP_BOTTOM_LSB); 22     pio_interrupt_clear(pio, sm); 23 }

We need some higher-level functions to pass correctly-formatted data though the FIFOs and insert Starts, Stops, NAKs and so on at the correct points. This is enough to present a similar interface to the other hardware I2Cs on RP2040.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/i2c/i2c_bus_scan.c Lines 13 - 42_

13 int main() { 14     stdio_init_all(); 15 16     PIO pio = pio0; 17     uint sm = 0; 18     uint offset = pio_add_program(pio, &i2c_program); 19     i2c_program_init(pio, sm, offset, PIN_SDA, PIN_SCL); 20 21     printf("\nPIO I2C Bus Scan\n"); 22     printf("   0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  A  B  C  D  E  F\n"); 23 24     for (int addr = 0; addr < (1 << 7); ++addr) { 25         if (addr % 16 == 0) { 26             printf("%02x ", addr); 27         } 28 _// Perform a 0-byte read from the probe address. The read function_ 29 _// returns a negative result NAK'd any time other than the last data_ 30 _// byte. Skip over reserved addresses._ 31         int result; 32         if (reserved_addr(addr)) 33             result = -1; 34         else 35             result = pio_i2c_read_blocking(pio, sm, addr, NULL, 0); 36 37         printf(result < 0 ? "." : "@"); 38         printf(addr % 16 == 15 ? "\n" : "  "); 39     } 40     printf("Done.\n"); 41     return 0; 42 }

## **3.6.8. PWM**

3.6. Examples

**364**

RP2040 Datasheet

_Figure 56. Pulse width modulation (PWM). The state machine outputs positive voltage pulses at regular intervals. The width of these pulses is controlled, so that the line is high for some controlled fraction of the time (the duty cycle). One use of this is to smoothly vary the brightness of an LED, by pulsing it faster than human persistence of vision._

**==> picture [201 x 45] intentionally omitted <==**

This program repeatedly counts down to 0 with the Y register, whilst comparing the Y count to a pulse width held in the X register. The output is asserted low before counting begins, and asserted high when the value in Y reaches X. Once Y reaches 0, the process repeats, and the output is once more driven low. The fraction of time that the output is high is therefore proportional to the pulse width stored in X.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/pwm/pwm.pio Lines 10 - 22_

10 .program pwm 11 .side_set 1 opt 12 13     pull noblock    side 0 ; Pull from FIFO to OSR if available, else copy X to OSR. 14     mov x, osr             ; Copy most-recently-pulled value back to scratch X 15     mov y, isr             ; ISR contains PWM period. Y used as counter. 16 countloop: 17     jmp x!=y noset         ; Set pin high if X == Y, keep the two paths length matched 18     jmp skip        side 1 19 noset: 20     nop                    ; Single dummy cycle to keep the two paths the same length 21 skip: 22     jmp y-- countloop      ; Loop until Y hits 0, then pull a fresh PWM value from FIFO

Often, a PWM can be left at a particular pulse width for thousands of pulses, rather than supplying a new pulse width each time. This example highlights how a nonblocking PULL (Section 3.4.7) can achieve this: if the TX FIFO is empty, a nonblocking PULL will copy X to the OSR. After pulling, the program copies the OSR into X, so that it can be compared to the count value in Y. The net effect is that, if a new duty cycle value has not been supplied through the TX FIFO at the start of this period, the duty cycle from the previous period (which has been copied from X to OSR via the failed PULL, and then back to X via the MOV) is _reused_ , for as many periods as necessary.

Another useful technique shown here is using the ISR as a configuration register, if IN instructions are not required. System software can load an arbitrary 32-bit value into the ISR (by executing instructions directly on the state machine), and the program will copy this value into Y each time it begins counting. The ISR can be used to configure the range of PWM counting, and the state machine’s clock divider controls the rate of counting.

To start modulating some pulses, we first need to map the state machine’s side-set pins to the GPIO we want to output PWM on, and tell the state machine where the program is loaded in the PIO instruction memory:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/pwm/pwm.pio Lines 25 - 31_

25 static inline void pwm_program_init(PIO pio, uint sm, uint offset, uint pin) { 26    pio_gpio_init(pio, pin); 27    pio_sm_set_consecutive_pindirs(pio, sm, pin, 1, true); 28    pio_sm_config c = pwm_program_get_default_config(offset); 29    sm_config_set_sideset_pins(&c, pin); 30    pio_sm_init(pio, sm, offset, &c); 31 }

A little footwork is required to load the ISR with the desired counting range:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/pwm/pwm.c Lines 14 - 20_

14 void pio_pwm_set_period(PIO pio, uint sm, uint32_t period) { 15     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, false); 16     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm, period); 17     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_pull(false, false));

3.6. Examples

**365**

RP2040 Datasheet

18     pio_sm_exec(pio, sm, pio_encode_out(pio_isr, 32)); 19     pio_sm_set_enabled(pio, sm, true); 20 }

Once this is done, the state machine can be enabled, and PWM values written directly to its TX FIFO.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/pwm/pwm.c Lines 23 - 25_

23 void pio_pwm_set_level(PIO pio, uint sm, uint32_t level) { 24     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm, level); 25 }

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/pwm/pwm.c Lines 27 - 51_

27 int main() { 28     stdio_init_all(); 29 _#ifndef PICO_DEFAULT_LED_PIN_ 30 _#warning pio/pwm example requires a board with a regular LED_ 31     puts("Default LED pin was not defined"); 32 _#else_ 33 34 _// todo get free sm_ 35     PIO pio = pio0; 36     int sm = 0; 37     uint offset = pio_add_program(pio, &pwm_program); 38     printf("Loaded program at %d\n", offset); 39 40     pwm_program_init(pio, sm, offset, PICO_DEFAULT_LED_PIN); 41     pio_pwm_set_period(pio, sm, (1u << 16) - 1); 42 43     int level = 0; 44     while (true) { 45         printf("Level = %d\n", level); 46         pio_pwm_set_level(pio, sm, level * level); 47         level = (level + 1) % 256; 48         sleep_ms(10); 49     } 50 _#endif_ 51 }

If the TX FIFO is kept topped up with fresh pulse width values, this program will consume a new pulse width for each pulse. Once the FIFO runs dry, the program will again start reusing the most recently supplied value.

## **3.6.9. Addition**

Although not designed for computation, PIO is quite likely Turing-complete, provided a long enough piece of tape can be found. It is conjectured that it could run DOOM, given a sufficiently high clock speed.

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/addition/addition.pio Lines 7 - 25_

7 .program addition 8 9 ; Pop two 32 bit integers from the TX FIFO, add them together, and push the 10 ; result to the TX FIFO. Autopush/pull should be disabled as we're using 11 ; explicit push and pull instructions. 12 ;

3.6. Examples

**366**

RP2040 Datasheet

13 ; This program uses the two's complement identity x + y == ~(~x - y) 14 15     pull 16     mov x, ~osr 17     pull 18     mov y, osr 19     jmp test        ; this loop is equivalent to the following C code: 20 incr:               ; while (y--) 21     jmp x-- test    ;     x--; 22 test:               ; This has the effect of subtracting y from x, eventually. 23     jmp y-- incr 24     mov isr, ~x 25     push

A full 32-bit addition takes only around one minute at 125MHz. The program pulls two numbers from the TX FIFO and pushes their sum to the RX FIFO, which is perfect for use either with the system DMA, or directly by the processor:

_Pico Examples: https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/blob/master/pio/addition/addition.c_

1 _/**_ 2 _* Copyright (c) 2020 Raspberry Pi (Trading) Ltd._ 3 _*_ 4 _* SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause_ 5 _*/_ 6 7 _#include <stdlib.h>_ 8 _#include <stdio.h>_ 9 10 _#include "pico/stdlib.h"_ 11 _#include "hardware/pio.h"_ 12 _#include "addition.pio.h"_ 13 14 _// Pop quiz: how many additions does the processor do when calling this function_ 15 uint32_t do_addition(PIO pio, uint sm, uint32_t a, uint32_t b) { 16     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm, a); 17     pio_sm_put_blocking(pio, sm, b); 18     return pio_sm_get_blocking(pio, sm); 19 } 20 21 int main() { 22     stdio_init_all(); 23 24     PIO pio = pio0; 25     uint sm = 0; 26     uint offset = pio_add_program(pio, &addition_program); 27     addition_program_init(pio, sm, offset); 28 29     printf("Doing some random additions:\n"); 30     for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i) { 31         uint a = rand() % 100; 32         uint b = rand() % 100; 33         printf("%u + %u = %u\n", a, b, do_addition(pio, sm, a, b)); 34     } 35 }

## **3.6.10. Further Examples**

The **Raspberry Pi Pico-series C/C++ SDK** book has a PIO chapter which goes into depth on some software-centric topics not presented here. It includes a PIO + DMA logic analyser example that can sample every GPIO on every cycle (a

3.6. Examples

**367**

RP2040 Datasheet

bandwidth of nearly 4Gbps at 125MHz, although this does fill up RP2040’s RAM quite quickly).

There are also further examples in the pio/ directory in the Pico Examples repository.

Some of the more experimental example code, such as DPI and SD card support, is currently located in the Pico Extras and Pico Playground repositories. The PIO parts of these are functional, but the surrounding software stacks are still in an experimental state.
